Predicting Responses to Drought

The U.S. Corn Belt accounts for a sizeable portion of the world's maize growth. Various influences have increased yields over the years. Lobell et al. (p. 516; see the Perspective by Ort and Long) now show that sensitivity to drought has been increasing as well. It seems that as plants have been bred for increased yield under ideal conditions, the plants become more sensitive to non-ideal conditions. A key factor may be the planting density. Although today's maize varieties are more robust to crowding and the farmer can get more plants in per field, this same crowding takes a toll when water resources are limited.

Greater Sensitivity to Drought Accompanies Maize Yield Increase in the U.S. Midwest

Abstract

A key question for climate change adaptation is whether existing cropping systems can become less sensitive to climate variations. We use a field-level data set on maize and soybean yields in the central United States for 1995 through 2012 to examine changes in drought sensitivity. Although yields have increased in absolute value under all levels of stress for both crops, the sensitivity of maize yields to drought stress associated with high vapor pressure deficits has increased. The greater sensitivity has occurred despite cultivar improvements and increased carbon dioxide and reflects the agronomic trend toward higher sowing densities. The results suggest that agronomic changes tend to translate improved drought tolerance of plants to higher average yields but not to decreasing drought sensitivity of yields at the field scale.

Drought is currently one of the main constraints to crop production in rainfed systems throughout the world, including in the United States. As a result, much breeding and agronomic research has been designed, at least in part, to improve performance under drought conditions (1). However, success in experimental fields does not always easily or completely translate to yield progress in farmers’ fields because drought characteristics in farmers’ commercial fields can differ substantially from trial conditions (2) and because different drought scenarios can favor different genotypes or management practices (3, 4).

In the United States, which typically supplies 40% of global annual maize production and 35% of global soybean production (5), several factors could be affecting drought sensitivity in farmers’ fields. On the positive side, increased use of low or no-till systems has likely increased soil moisture in dry years, and increasing CO2 concentrations typically lead to higher plant water-use efficiencies, thereby reducing drought sensitivity (6, 7). At the same time, in maize, modern genetics has facilitated increased sowing density because individual plants are better able to develop ears under stress (8, 9), roots are able to penetrate deeper and access more water (10), and genetically engineered pest resistance has reduced root damage from soil insects (11). All of these have contributed to historical gains in biomass and yields, but increased density can be detrimental under drought conditions because of excessive stress exposure for individual plants (12). Thus, the net effect of recent genetic, agronomic, and environmental changes on drought sensitivity remains an open empirical question.

An obstacle to measuring progress in farmers’ fields has been lack of accurate field-level data on both environmental conditions and yield performance that span a range of drought conditions and time. Here, we use a data set of field-level records on yields and sowing dates collected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Risk Management Agency since 1995 (Fig. 1) and combine that with 800-m-resolution daily weather data sets (see supplementary materials). These data are used to identify and group “location-year” combinations that have similar drought stress levels and measure yield progress over time for different stress levels. The study was conducted for maize and soybean, the two major field crops in the region.

Fig. 1 Study area and yield distributions.

(A) Map of main study region, with individual points showing locations of fields for maize in the USDA data. (B) Summary statistics of field-level maize (green) and soybean (orange) yields over the study period. Horizontal bands indicate sample median, and bars show interquartile range (25th to 75th percentile). Bu/Ac, bushels per acre.

Tracking yield progress at different levels of stress requires a clear and accurate measure of stress experienced by a crop. In field trials, stress levels are often quantified as the average yield across all cultivars grown at a given site and season, sometimes referred to as an environment index (13, 14). A plot of a cultivar’s yield versus environment index is then used to measure the sensitivity of that cultivar’s yield to stress. To define the environment index, we use the USDA data to calibrate a statistical model relating yields to weather. To allow for potential nonlinearities, asymmetries, and interactions between different variables, we employ multivariate adaptive regression splines (15). As candidate predictors for the regression splines, we use four weather variables [minimum and maximum temperatures, precipitation, and daytime vapor pressure deficit (VPD)] averaged over five successive 30-day periods spanning from 30 days before sowing to 120 days after sowing, resulting in a total of 20 candidate weather predictors (16). VPD is a widely used measure of atmospheric water demand that depends on air temperature and humidity and has a strong influence on plant growth rates in these systems (17, 18). We also repeated the analysis using the Palmer Drought Severity Index (16).

Figures S1 and S2 summarize the regression model calibrated for the maize and soybean data, respectively. The maize model selected six variables, with the most influential being VPD in the third month after sowing, which is typically July for a field sown in early May. An increase in VPD has a negative and nonlinear effect, with high values especially damaging, both of which are consistent with physiological understanding and previous empirical and crop modeling studies (17, 19). Some of the effects of high VPD may be associated with direct effects on pollen and grain set (20), but this mechanism appears to play a minor role in this region relative to VPD effects on water stress and overall plant growth rates (17). For soybean, five variables were selected, with VPD again the most important, and with precipitation playing a more important role than in maize.

The regression models are then used to calculate an environment index for each field in each year, which is defined as the predicted yield assuming a constant level of technology (year is fixed at 2000 for all predictions). As seen for maize in Fig. 2A (or fig. S3 for soybean), most years have the full range of conditions experienced throughout the region, but the exact locations of low or high stress change each year.

Fig. 2 Maize yields in different environments over time.

(A) The locations of environment index quintiles for maize for each study year. Red indicates the lowest environment index values, indicating the worst yield conditions, and blue indicates the best conditions. (B) Average maize yields (Bu/Ac) for each environment index quintile by year. Dashed lines show best-fit linear regression for each quintile. (C) Same as in (B) but expressed as fraction of trend yield under good conditions (i.e., highest quintile).

Mean yields for each quintile of the environment index exhibit significantly positive trends (P < 0.05) over time in absolute yields for all stress quintiles (Fig. 2B). In an absolute sense, yields under drought conditions have steadily improved over time, as emphasized in previous analyses of improved stress tolerance in maize (8, 9). However, yields have been rising more slowly at the lowest quintile than other stress levels, even when expressed as a percentage of yields at the start of the study period (1995), so that yields in the most stressed quintile have been declining relative to other quintiles (Fig. 2C).

A possible confounding factor in the above analysis is the fact that some locations are more frequently exposed to stress than others (Fig. 2A), and therefore trend differences that arise from location-specific factors that are unrelated to stress could either obscure or enhance any trend differences due to changes in stress sensitivity. As a robustness check, we therefore repeat the analysis of Fig. 2B, but first removing all time trends for each county and for all variables. This “detrended” analysis therefore considers whether positive yield anomalies when conditions are anomalously good have been rising over time. Consistent with Fig. 2B, we find that absolute anomalies are indeed growing over time (fig. S4).

Conditions of high VPD 61 to 90 days after sowing are the most important driver of a low environment index in this region, and we find that yield trends for the highest quintile of VPD are significantly lower than for the lowest quintile (P = 0.04) (Fig. 3A). Importantly, this finding is robust to the exclusion of 2012, which was a particularly low-yielding and high-VPD year (fig. S5). In contrast, the second most important factor for maize yields, late sowing, exhibits yield trends that are actually higher than trends for the more favorable early sow dates (Fig. 3B), although these differences are not significant. Thus, the overall slower progress under low-yielding conditions is the net effect of significantly slower progress for high VPD relative to low VPD, countered by slightly better progress for late relative to early sowing. Similar to maize, yield trends in soybean are higher in absolute value under good conditions than in poor conditions (fig. S5). However, soybean yield trends do not exhibit any significant dependence on VPD or other environment index predictors.

Fig. 3 Effects of vapor pressure deficit (VPD) and sowing date on maize yields.

(A) Yield response curves for VPD from multivariate adaptive regression spline model (see fig. S1 for explanation). Colors at bottom of figure indicate ranges for each quintile of that variable. (Inset) Yield trends for 1995 to 2012 corresponding to each quintile of VPD. (B) Same as in (A) but for sowing date. Error bars, mean ± 1 SE. Time trends for the highest quintile of VPD are significantly lower than for the lowest quintile (P = 0.04). Response curves and yield trends for other predictors and for soybean are shown in figs. S1, S2, and S5.

Repeating the analysis for the Palmer drought index rather than VPD leads to qualitatively similar results, with yield trends lower for the lowest quintile of the Palmer index (fig. S6). However, the Palmer index is a poorer predictor of yields than VPD, and as a result trend differences between low and high values of the Palmer index are less statistically significant. This agrees with previous work showing that the Palmer index, although a common variable used to measure drought, is actually a relatively poor predictor of crop water stress as simulated by a crop model (21).

As an alternative test of whether sensitivity to VPD has indeed been increasing over time in this region for maize, a cross-sectional regression model between yield and VPD was fit separately for each year. The coefficient on VPD becomes increasingly negative over time, with a significant negative time slope even if excluding 2012, and even if including county-fixed effects in the cross-section regressions to control for omitted variables (Fig. 4A and fig. S7). All other predictors of maize yields showed insignificant time trends in cross-sectional regressions (fig. S7).

Fig. 4 Changes in vapor pressure deficit and its impacts.

(A) Estimates of maize yield sensitivity to VPD 61 to 90 days after sowing from a cross-sectional regression for each year in the study period, along with best-fit trend lines with (solid) or without (dashed) including 2012 for computing the trend. Red dots indicate sensitivity estimates from APSIM simulations with sowing densities corresponding to the start and end of the study period. (B) Average July VPD in the study region for historical and projected periods. Dots show individual year observations, gray line shows linear trend for 1995 to 2012, black line shows mean VPD projected using 29 climate models, blue shading indicates 25th to 75th percentile of model projections, and gray shading indicates 5th to 95th percentiles. (C) Estimated impact of mean VPD projections on average maize yields using either constant yield sensitivity of –27.5% per kPa or a linear increase in sensitivity at the historical rate of 7% per kPa per decade.

Although this study is focused on the core Corn Belt states, USDA data are also available for other states. When our analysis is repeated for a broader group of Corn Belt states, the slower trends for high VPD persists (fig. S8). We also consider separately the western Corn Belt, where seed companies have arguably focused more of their efforts to test and release drought-tolerant seeds in the past decade (22), and one might expect more progress for drought conditions. Figs. S9 and S10 show the analysis repeated for rainfed maize fields in Nebraska, South Dakota, and Kansas. Similar variables are identified as important for maize in this region, with VPD 61 to 90 days after sowing the most critical, and precipitation in that period also important. The disparity between yield trends in low- and high-stress conditions is even more evident in this region than in the eastern states, with significantly slower yield progress under high VPD conditions.

One likely explanation for the increased sensitivity to VPD is the continuing trend toward denser sowing of maize crops. In Illinois, for example, average plant populations have gone from slightly under 24,000 plants per acre in 1995 to 30,000 by 2012 (a 25% increase over our study period) (23, 24). Similar trends have occurred in other Corn Belt states (23). To evaluate this mechanism more directly, we simulated maize yields using the Agricultural Production Systems Simulator (APSIM) model for a representative site under sowing densities of 24,000 and 35,000 plants per acre, or 6.0 and 7.5 plants per m2, respectively. Simulations under higher density exhibited higher average yields, but significantly higher sensitivity to VPD than simulations for lower density (fig. S11). The estimated yield response to high VPD 61 to 90 days after sowing in the simulations (–15% and –28% per kPa, respectively) agreed with the cross-sectional analysis of the USDA data (Fig. 4A). The importance of density is also suggested by the fact that soybeans, which show weaker evidence of increased drought sensitivity, have exhibited relatively constant sowing densities since 1995 in this region (24, 25).

Our results agree with the general notion that as farmers become more adept at removing all nonwater constraints to crop production, the sensitivity to drought generally increases (26). Given the dominant role of temperature (via VPD) in driving water stress in this region, our results are also consistent with the finding that heat sensitivity of maize yields in Indiana increased in recent decades (27). One implication is that climate change effects may be more severe than predicted by models that assume current crop genetics and management. Climate model projections indicate that July VPD for this region will become more severe, with an expected increase in average VPD of roughly 20% over the next 50 years (Fig. 4B), driven both by higher temperatures and reduced relative humidity. At current VPD sensitivity, these VPD trends would reduce yields by about 15% over the next 50 years. If maize yields continue to become increasingly sensitive to VPD, then yield losses from VPD trends could be as much as 30% (Fig. 4C).

Overall, we find no evidence to support the notion that farmers’ yields are becoming less sensitive to drought in the main maize- and soybean-growing states. Instead, we find evidence that drought sensitivity in maize, in particular sensitivity to high VPD, has steadily increased over the past 18 years. Whether the recent push by seed companies to develop and market drought-tolerant seeds will reverse this trend remains to be seen. It is clear that cultivar changes are not the only relevant factor for changes in drought sensitivity, because agronomic trends—often facilitated by the cultivar changes—can be as or more important. It is also clear that new, field-level data sets on farm performance can complement field-based experiments in efforts to understand changes in drought sensitivity in this important production region.
Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change
Abstract

The United States produces 41% of the world's corn and 38% of the world's soybeans. These crops comprise two of the four largest sources of caloric energy produced and are thus critical for world food supply. We pair a panel of county-level yields for these two crops, plus cotton (a warmer-weather crop), with a new fine-scale weather dataset that incorporates the whole distribution of temperatures within each day and across all days in the growing season. We find that yields increase with temperature up to 29° C for corn, 30° C for soybeans, and 32° C for cotton but that temperatures above these thresholds are very harmful. The slope of the decline above the optimum is significantly steeper than the incline below it. The same nonlinear and asymmetric relationship is found when we isolate either time-series or cross-sectional variations in temperatures and yields. This suggests limited historical adaptation of seed varieties or management practices to warmer temperatures because the cross-section includes farmers' adaptations to warmer climates and the time-series does not. Holding current growing regions fixed, area-weighted average yields are predicted to decrease by 30–46% before the end of the century under the slowest (B1) warming scenario and decrease by 63–82% under the most rapid warming scenario (A1FI) under the Hadley III model.

    agriculture panel analysis time series cross section farmer adaptation

With evidence accumulating that greenhouse gas concentrations are warming the world's climate, research focuses increasingly on estimating impacts that may occur under different warming scenarios and how economies might adapt to changing climatic conditions. Agriculture is a key focus because of its direct connection to climate. Although agriculture comprises a small share of GDP in the United States, the U.S. persists in being the world's largest agricultural producer and exporter of agricultural commodities, so impacts in the U.S. could have broad implications for food supply and prices worldwide. At the same time, debate continues about whether warming will be a net gain or loss for agriculture in currently temperate climates like that of the United States (1–8).

In this paper, we estimate the link between weather and yields for the three crops with the largest production value in the United States: corn, soybeans, and cotton. Corn and soybeans, the nation's most prevalent crops, are the predominant source of feed grains used in cattle, dairy, poultry, and hog production. Corn is also the main source of U.S. ethanol. Cotton is the fourth-largest crop in acres planted, but more valuable on a per-acre basis and more suited to warmer climates than are corn and soybeans. Estimating the correct relationship between weather and yields for these major crops is a critical first step before more elaborate models can be used to examine how crop-planting choices, food and fiber supply, and prices will ultimately shift in response to climate change.

Our data are comprised of new fine-scale weather outcomes merged together with a large panel of crop yields that spans most U.S. counties from 1950 to 2005. The new weather data include the length of time each crop is exposed to each one-degree Celsisus temperature interval in each day, summed across all days of the growing season, all estimated for the specific locations within each county where crops are grown. The new fine-scale weather data facilitate estimation of a flexible model that can detect nonlinearities and breakpoints in the effect of temperature on yield. If the true underlying relationship is nonlinear (e.g., increasing and then decreasing in temperature), averaging over time or space dilutes the true temperature response. For example, similar average temperatures may arise from two very different days, one with little temperature variation and one with wide temperature variation. Holding the average temperature constant, days with more variation will include more exposure to extreme outcomes, which can critically influence yields (9). The empirical challenge is to map an entire season of widely varying temperature outcomes to each year's yield. Accurate estimation of nonlinear effects is particularly important when considering large, nonmarginal changes in temperatures, now expected with climate change.

Results

Regression analyses, which control in various ways for precipitation, technological change, soils, and location-specific unobserved factors, all show a similar nonlinear relationship between temperature and yields. Additional results and sensitivity checks are given in the SI Appendix.
Yield Growth Increases Gradually with Temperature up to 29–32° Celsius, Depending on the Crop, and then Decreases Sharply for All Three Crops.

Estimates and standard errors of temperature effects for all three crops are displayed in Fig. 1. The figure has three frames, where each column represents one crop. Different specifications of the link between temperature and yield growth are indicated by the color of the estimated curve. The blue line shows the most flexible specification, a step function that fits a separate growth rate for each three-degree temperature range. The black line shows the specification where yield growth is modeled as an eighth-order polynomial function of temperature and the 95% confidence band after adjusting for spatial correlation is added in gray. The red line shows a piecewise linear specification that follows the agronomic concept of degree days. Each specification shows the same characteristic shape, increasing modestly up to a critical temperature and then decreasing sharply. For corn, the critical threshold temperature is 29° C; for soybeans it is 30° C; and for cotton it is 32° C.

Nonlinear relation between temperature and yields. Graphs at the top of each frame display changes in log yield if the crop is exposed for one day to a particular 1° C temperature interval where we sum the fraction of a day during which temperatures fall within each interval. The 95% confidence band, after adjusting for spatial correlation, is added as gray area for the polynomial regression. Curves are centered so that the exposure-weighted impact is zero. Histograms at the bottom of each frame display the average temperature exposure among all counties in the data.

The vertical axis in each figure marks the log of yield (bushels per acre for corn and soybeans and bales per acre for cotton) with the exposure-weighted average predicted yield normalized to zero. The horizontal axis is temperature. In comparing two points on any curve, a vertical difference of 0.01 indicates an approximately 1% difference in average yield for the year. For example, the blue line frame A (the flexible model for corn), substituting a full day (24 h) at 29° C temperature with a full day at 40° C temperature results in a predicted yield decline of ≈7%, holding all else the same. The green histogram shows the average exposure to each one-degree Celsius interval during the growing season (March–August for corn and soybeans and April–October for cotton).

Coefficients on other explanatory variables (precipitation, squared precipitation, county fixed effects, and state-specific quadratic time trends) are not reported here. Precipitation has a statistically significant inverted-U shape with an estimated yield-maximizing level of 25.0 inches for corn and 27.2 inches for soybeans in the flexible step-function specification in Fig. 1. The precipitation variables are not statistically significant for cotton, which is not surprising given that 58% of the crop is irrigated. Fixed effects control for time-invariant heterogeneity (like soil quality) and state-specific quadratic time trends control for technological change. With wide geographic variation in average yields and a three-fold increase in yields over the sample period, these controls have strong statistical significance.

The pattern of temperature effects is quite robust to specification and controls. The same nonlinear temperature effect emerges whether or not any of the controls, or any subset of controls, are included in the regressions. We also find the estimated temperature effects to be very similar if we instead control for technology and time effects by using year-fixed effects rather than state-specific quadratic time trends.
Holding Current Growing Regions Fixed, Area-Weighted Average Yields Are Predicted to Decrease by 30–46% Before the End of the Century Under the Slowest Hadley III Warming Scenario (B1), and Decline by 63–82% Under the Most Rapid Warming Scenario (A1FI).

For comparison, a linear model that uses the average growing-season temperature as an explanatory variable gives predicted impacts of −16% to +3% (B1) and −30% to +6% (A1FI) among the three crops. Yield predictions are summarized in Fig. 2. Frame A shows predictions for the medium term (2020–2049) and frame B for the long term (2070–2099). Predictions are for changes in total production under four climate scenarios in the Hadley III climate model. Across all scenarios, model specifications, and crops, the aggregate impacts show marked declines, even though yields in some individual counties are projected to increase. The driving force behind these large and significant predicted impacts is the projected increase in frequency of extremely warm temperatures.

Predicted climate-change impacts on crop yields under the Hadley III climate model. Graphs display predicted percentage changes in crop yields under four emissions scenarios. Frame A displays predicted impacts in the medium term (2020–2049) and frame B shows the long term (2070–2099). A star indicates the point estimates, and whiskers show the 95% confidence interval after adjusting for spatial correlation. The color corresponds to the regression models in Fig. 1.
Out-of-Sample Model Predictions Are More Accurate than Previous Statistical Models.

The new regression models were compared with other specifications in the literature by using the root-mean squared error (RMS) of out-of-sample predictions. Each model is estimated 1,000 times, randomly choosing 48 years of our 56-year history of yields. The estimates are then used to predict yield outcomes for the remaining eight years (≈14%) of each sample. We randomly sample whole years and not observations because yields are spatially correlated in any given year. We compare our own three specifications of temperature effects (step function, polynomial, and piecewise linear) with three alternative specifications: (i) a model with average temperatures for each of four months (1); (ii) an approximation of growing-degree days based on monthly average temperatures (Thom's formula) (4); and (iii) a measure of growing-degree days, calculated by using daily mean temperatures (8), that does not include a separate category for extremely warm temperatures.

As a baseline, we consider a model with county-fixed effects and quadratic state-level trends, but no weather variables. Such a model simply forecasts the average yield trend for a county in each year. We derive the percent reduction in the RMS if weather variables are also included. Results are summarized in Fig. 3. A reduction by 100% would imply that the model produces no error and gives a perfect forecast, whereas a percent reduction of 0% implies that the weather variables have no additional explanatory power.

Out-of-sample prediction comparison for various model specifications. Bar charts display the percent reduction in the root-mean-squared prediction error (RMS) for each model in comparison with a baseline model with no weather variable. Each model is estimated 1,000 times, where each replication randomly selects 48 of the 56 years in our full sample. Relative performance is measured according to the accuracy of each model's prediction for the omitted eight years of the sample (≈14%). We sample years instead of observations because year-to-year weather fluctuations are random, but there is considerable spatial correlation across counties within each year. Step function, polynomial (eighth order), and piecewise linear are the models developed in this paper; the other models are from the existing literature.

The new models reduce RMS by between 40% and 360% more than other specifications. Welch tests find no significant difference between our three models, but strongly significant differences are found when compared with other specifications in the literature.
The Same Nonlinear Relationship Between Yields and Temperature Is Observed in both the Cross-Section of Counties and the Aggregate Year-to-Year Time Series.

The results described in Yield Growth Increases Gradually with Temperature up to 29–32° Celsius are from regression models with county-fixed effects, which identify temperature effects on yields using within-county time-series weather variation. Although random variation is useful from a statistical standpoint, such analysis accounts only for grower adaptation in response to current-year weather (e.g., additional use of irrigation in a dry year), and not for systematic crop- or variety-switching in anticipation of a different climate. In contrast, a cross-sectional analysis identifies temperature effects by using only variations between counties with different climates. Both the cross-section and the time series give results comparable with the baseline model that pools weather and climate variations. In particular, the cross-sectional and time-series estimates show the same characteristic nonlinear temperature relationship, similar optimal temperatures, and predict nearly equal yield impacts under Hadley III climate-change scenarios.
The Nonlinear Relationship Between Yield and Temperature Observed in Cooler Northern States Is Similar to the One Observed in Warmer Southern States.

To explore how the temperature-yield relationship varies over different regions of the country, we divided our sample into three mutually exclusive geographical regions corresponding to the most northern (and coolest) states, the most southern (and warmest) states, and those in the middle. We focus on corn because it is grown over the widest geographic area and has been by far the most valuable crop grown in the United States. The interesting feature is the relative stability of the estimated temperature relationship across the three subregions.
The Nonlinear Relationship Between Yield and Temperature Observed Between 1950 and 1977 Was the Same as the One Observed Between 1978 and 2005.

To explore how the temperature-yield relationship has changed over time, we split the sample into two time periods of equal length, 1950–1977 and 1978–2005. The critical threshold when temperatures become harmful is rather robust over time. The similarity of the temperature-yield relationship across subsamples is particularly interesting given that, because of technological change, average yields in the more recent sample are about twice those in the earlier sample.
Greater Precipitation Partially Mitigates Damages from Extreme High Temperatures.

We explore interactions between temperature and precipitation outcomes by dividing the sample into quartiles of total precipitation during the months of June and July. These estimates have a shape similar to those of the pooled sample up to the critical temperature threshold. The decline above the threshold, however, is less steep for corn subsamples with greater precipitation.* However, omitting temperature-rainfall interactions will not bias predictions of average effects of temperature and rainfall, as we do not find a significant correlation between temperature outcomes and precipitation outcomes in the raw daily data.
The Estimated Climate-Change Impacts Are Insensitive to the Specified Growing Season and Consistent with Time Separability.

The baseline model uses temperature and precipitation measures for the months of March through August for corn and soybeans. In practice, northern regions tend to plant later than southern regions, and planting dates may vary from year-to-year depending on weather conditions. The SI Appendix shows results from eight alternative specifications of the growing season, all with comparable results. When we limit the growing season to two-month intervals or estimate separate temperature response functions for July (when corn flowers) and other months, we find qualitatively similar temperature-response functions for each subperiod. Although F tests give significantly different coefficient estimates in July compared to the pooled remaining months, the fit (R2) hardly increases at all when breaking the growing season into various subperiods and predicted climate-change impacts that are not significantly different. For example, a corn-yield model with separate temperature coefficients for July only slightly increases the R2 from 0.7654 to 0.7698 under the step function and changes overall predicted long-run yield impact from −43% to −44% under the slow-warming scenario (B1) and from −79% to −74% under the fast-warming scenario (A1FI).

Discussion

Many studies, spanning several disciplines and employing different methods, have linked weather and climate to agricultural outcomes such as yields, land values, and farm profits, each with their own set of strengths and weaknesses.

Agronomic studies are the predominant tool used to evaluate potential effects from climate change. Examples include refs.13–17, but there are many others. These studies emphasize the dynamic physiological process of plant growth, seed formation, and yield. The process is understood to be quite complex and dynamic in nature and thus not easily estimated in a regression framework. Instead, these studies use a rich theoretical model to simulate yields given daily and subdaily weather inputs, nutrient applications, and initial soil conditions. In some cases, simulated yields are compared with observed yields with some success. We are not aware of any agronomic study that has tested a simulation model by using data different from what was used to calibrate it. Current versions of models developed for many crops are maintained by the Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer (www.icasa.net/dssat/).

A strength of simulation models is that they fully incorporate plant-growth theory. These models also incorporate the whole distribution of weather outcomes over the growing season. This differs markedly from earlier regression-based approaches that typically use average weather outcomes or averages from particular months and thus give biased estimates of nonlinear temperature effects. Potential weaknesses of simulation approaches are their complexity, uncertainty about the structure of the physiological process, and the large number of parameters. Some agronomists seem to worry about possible misspecification and omitted variables biases (10–12). These models also take production systems and nutrient applications as exogenous: There is no account of farm operators' decisions.

Several earlier economic studies use hedonic models to associate land values to land characteristics, including climate, by using reduced-form linear regression models (e.g., refs. 1, 4, and 6). A strength of this approach is that it accounts for the whole agricultural sector, not just a single crop at a time. It can also account for farm operator behavior and adaptation. Cooler areas are likely to become more like warmer areas, with crop choices, management practices, and land values changing in accordance with current geographic variation in climate.

The overarching concern with the hedonic approach, and with cross-sectional studies generally, is omitted variables bias. Climate variables (e.g., average temperature) and other variables, such as soil types, distance to cities, and irrigation systems, are all spatially correlated. If critical variables correlated with climate are omitted from the regression model, the climate variables may pick up effects of variables besides climate and lead to biased estimates and predictions. Cross-sectional studies may be strongly suggestive, but do not carry the same empirical weight as a physical or natural experiment. Indeed, earlier work shows how omission of heavily subsidized irrigation systems strongly influences predicted climate impacts (18).

Recently, Auffhammer, Ramanathan, and Vincent (7) used a panel of yields and weather outcomes in India to model the role of brown clouds. Similarly, Deschênes and Greenstone (8) linked agricultural profits in the United States to yearly weather variations by using a four-year county-level panel from the Census of Agriculture. Whereas both studies aggregate weather, our model, like simulation models, incorporates the whole distribution of temperature outcomes in a flexible way. Unlike simulation models, it is amenable to estimation by using standard regression analysis. Like refs. 7 and 8, we consider specifications with county-fixed effects to identify parameters by using year-to-year weather variations that serve as a natural experiment. Like ref. 7, but unlike ref. 8, we focus on yields rather than profits. Potential problems with the use of profits are discussed in ref. 19.

Our study aims to combine the strengths of previous approaches. We use fine-scale weather data and combine it with flexible regression models. The findings are notable for the consistency of the estimated nonlinear temperature effects across time, locations, crops, and the many sources of variation in temperature and precipitation considered.

Perhaps most interesting is the consistency of the estimated relationship when comparing estimates based on year-to-year weather variations and cross-sectional climate variations. This finding suggests limited historical adaptation to extreme heat for any given crop. This implication follows from the fact that cross-sectional variations include farmers' adaptations to warmer climates whereas estimates using time-series variations do not. The first approach is akin to hedonic models that link land values to average weather outcomes, except that it does not account for crop switching.

There are, of course, many other possible adaptations that this study cannot address. The simplest form of adaptation would be to change the locations or seasons where and when crops are grown.† Understanding the scope for this kind of change would require more careful analysis of potential yield effects on a global scale. Furthermore, if climate change were anticipated to induce severe yield impacts on a global scale, then anticipated increases in commodity prices would likely encourage greater investments in new seed varieties, irrigation systems, and other technological changes. Thus, although historical data show the same heat tolerance in the first and second half of our sample, greater heat tolerance still may be possible if greater returns for such innovation arise. Recently, a National Science Foundation-funded study completed a draft sequence of the corn genome, which might make it easier to develop new corn varieties with greater heat tolerance (see http://monsanto.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=576 for more information).

An important caveat concerns our inability to account for CO2 concentrations. Plants use CO2 as an input in the photosynthesis process, so increasing CO2 levels might spur plant growth and yields. Yield declines stemming from warmer temperatures therefore may be offset by CO2-fertilization. Although higher CO2 concentrations may boost yields, the magnitude of the effect is still debated. Long, et al. (12, 20) recently stressed that existing laboratory studies and field experiments might overestimate this effect. We cannot account for CO2 effects in regression analysis of observed yields because CO2 concentrations quickly dissipate throughout the atmosphere, leaving only a gently increasing time trend, which is impossible to statistically disentangle from technological change.

Methods

Data.

Yields for corn, soybeans, and cotton for the years 1950–2005 are reported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's National Agricultural Statistical Service. These yields equal total county-level production divided by acres harvested. We limit the analysis to counties east of the 100° meridian (excluding Florida) for corn and soybeans because cropland in the West often relies on heavily subsidized irrigation systems.‡ For cotton, we use all counties that report cotton yields because there are fewer observations and a larger share of cotton is grown in the West. In the SI Appendix we report results for all three crops if we split them into Eastern and Western subsets. Results differ substantially for corn and soybeans, but to a lesser degree for cotton, and we hence pool observations from the East and West for the latter. For results reported here, we have 105,981 observations with corn yields, 82,385 observations with soybeans yields, and 31,540 observations with cotton yields.

Construction of the fine-scale weather data are briefly described here and in more detail in ref. 21 and the SI Appendix. The basic steps are as follows. We first develop daily predictions of minimum and maximum temperature on a 2.5 × 2.5-mile grid for the entire United States. We then derive the time at which a crop is exposed to each one-degree Celsius interval in each grid cell in each day. These predictions are merged with a satellite scan that allows us to select only those grid cells with cropland. We then aggregate the whole distribution of outcomes for all days in the growing season in each county. To preserve within-county temperature variation, it is important to derive the time each grid cell is exposed to each one-degree Celsius interval before aggregating to obtain the county-level distribution.§ The average historical weather distribution and its variability across time and space are summarized in the SI Appendix.

To examine whether corn varieties have been adapted to warmer temperatures, we divide the United States into three regions, the northern, the interior, and the southern, all east of the 100° meridian.¶

Climate-change predictions are drawn from the Hadley III model (www.metoffice.com/research/hadleycentre/). We obtain a monthly model output for both minimum and maximum temperatures under four major emissions scenarios (A1FI, A2, B1, and B2) for the years 1960–2099. The B1 scenario assumes the slowest rate of warming over the next century and the A1FI scenario assumes continued use of fossil fuels, which results in the largest increase in CO2-concentrations and temperatures. The B2 and A2 scenarios fall between the B1 and A1F1 scenario. We find the predicted difference in monthly mean temperature for 2020–2049 (medium-term), 2070–2099 (long-term), and historic averages (1960–1989) at each of 216 Hadley grid nodes covering the United States. Predicted changes in monthly minimum and maximum temperature at each 2.5 × 2.5-mile PRISM grid are calculated as the weighted average of the monthly mean change in the four surrounding Hadley grid points, where the weights are proportional to the inverse squared distance and forced to sum to one. In a final step, we add predicted absolute changes in monthly minimum and maximum temperatures at each PRISM grid to the observed daily time series from 1960 to 1989. In other words, we shift the historical distribution by the mean monthly change predicted by each climate scenario. An analogous approach was used for precipitation, except that we use the relative ratio of future predicted rainfall to historic rainfall instead of absolute changes. The predicted changes in temperatures under various scenarios are shown in the SI Appendix.

Regression Models.

We assume temperature effects on yields are cumulative over time and that yield is proportional to total exposure. This implies temperature effects are additively substitutable over time. Specifically, plant growth g(h) depends nonlinearly on heat h. Log yield, yit, in county i and year t is Embedded Image where φit(h) is the time distribution of heat over the growing season in county i and year t. We fix the growing season to months March through August for corn and soybeans and the months April through October for cotton. Observed temperatures during this time period range between the lower bound h and the upper bound h̄. Other control factors are denoted zit and include a quadratic in total precipitation as well as quadratic time trends by state to capture technological change. Finally, ci is a time-invariant county-fixed effect to control for time-invariant heterogeneity, such as soil quality. We allow the error terms εit to be spatially correlated by using the nonparametric routine used by ref. 24.

By using data on exposure to each 1° C temperature interval, we approximate the above integral with Embedded Image where Φit(h) is the cumulative distribution function of heat in county i and year t.

We consider three specifications for g(h): A step function with a different growth rate in each 3° C temperature interval; an eighth order Chebychev polynomial; and a piecewise linear function. Details are provided in the SI Appendix.

Perhaps the strongest assumption of the regression models is time separability of temperature effects. This assumption is partly rooted in agronomy. In crop simulation models, however, temperature effects can vary over the life cycle of the plant. In the SI Appendix, we report results from a model that uses various definitions of the growing season and allows the coefficients to be time-varying over the growing season.

Climate Change and Agriculture in the United States: Effects and Adaptation 

Table of Contents 

Executive Summary  1 

Key Messages  1 

Introduction  2 

Crop Response to Changing Climate  3 

Livestock Response to Changing Climate  4 

Effects of Climate Change on Soil and Water  4 

Extreme Events  5 

Adaptation  6 

Research Needs  7 

Understanding Exposure  7 

Understanding Sensitivity  8 

Enhancing Adaptive Capacity  8 

Chapter 1: U.S. Agriculture and Climate  9 

Report Goals and Scope  9 

Document Organization 10 

Authors 10 

Chapter 2: An Overview of U.S. Agriculture 11 

Forces Affecting U.S. Agriculture 12 

Economic Factors and U.S. Agriculture 12 

Effects of Technology on U.S. Agriculture 17
Climate Effects on U.S. Agriculture 17 

Agriculture: A Complex Social-Ecological System (SES) 19 

New Research for a Novel Challenge 20 

Chapter 3: An Overview of the Changing Climate 23 

Evidence of Changing Climate Across the Globe 23 

Projections of Future Global Climate 24 

Changing Climate Across the United States: The Last 100 Years 24 

Temperature 26 

Precipitation 27 

Projections of Future U.S. Climate Change 29 

Temperature 29 

Precipitation 30 

Extreme Conditions 31 

Changes in Tropospheric Ozone 32 

Conclusions 33 


Chapter 4: Climate Change Science and Agriculture 35 

Direct Climate Change Effects 35 

Air Temperature 35 

Water 36 

Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 36 

Tropospheric Ozone 38 

Indirect Climate Change Effects 39 

Weeds and Invasive Plant Species 39 

Invasive Weeds 41 

Insect Pests 44 

Pathogens 49 

Conclusions 52 

Chapter 5: Climate Change Effects on U.S. Agricultural Production 53 

Aggregate Effects 53 

Agricultural Soil Resources 53 

Soil Degradation and Soil Erosion 53 

Rainfall 54 

Irrigation 54 

Snow and Winter Processes 55 

Wind 55 

Changing Agricultural Production and the Effects on Soil Erosion 55 

Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 56 

Adaptation 56 

Agricultural Water Resources and Irrigation 56 

The U.S. Irrigated Sector Under a Changing Climate 57 

Agricultural Water Requirements 57 

Water-Supply Availability 57 

Returns to Crop Production 58 

Adaptation 59 

Ecosystem Services 59 

Pollinators 60 

Adaptation 61 

U.S. Agricultural Production 61 

Corn and Soybean 61 

Rice 63 

Wheat 67 

Cotton 69 

Annual Specialty Crops 75 

Perennial Specialty Crops 78 

Grazing Lands and Domestic Livestock 88 

Conclusions 97 

Table of Contents 


Chapter 6: Climate Change Effects on the Economics of U.S. Agriculture 99 

Economic Impacts and Agricultural Adaptation  100 

Estimating Economic Impacts of Climate Change  101 

Sensitivity of Economic Impact Estimates to Climate and Yield Projections  103 

Sensitivity of Economic Impact Estimates to Scope of Analysis  104 

Sensitivity of Economic Impact Estimates to Socioeconomic and Technology Projections and
Treatment of Adaptation Constraints  106 

The Changing Geography of Production  107 

Sensitivity of Economic Impact Estimates to Estimation Methodology  107 

International Effects and Food Security Implications  108 

Climate Change Effects and the Environment  110 

Climate Change, Economic Resilience, and Extreme Weather Events  110 

Extreme Events  111 

Crop Insurance  112 

Workable Field Days  115 

Soil Erosion  116 

Conclusions  118 

Chapter 7: Adapting to Climate Change  119 

Understanding Agricultural Vulnerability  119 

Adaptation Drivers  120 

A Typology of Adaptation  121 

Enhancing the Adaptive Capacity of Agriculture  123 

Climate Policy  124 

National Climate Change Adaptation Strategies  125 

Agricultural Adaptation Policy  125 

Mitigation and Adaptation: Complement or Tradeoff?  126 

Integrated Assessment of Mitigation and Adaptation Responses  127 

Adaptation Costs and Benefits  128 

Limits to Adaptation  128 

Ecological Limits to Adaptation  128 

Social Barriers to Adaptation  129 

Assessing Options, Taking Action  130 

Vulnerability Assessment  130 

Assessing Adaptive Capacity  132 

Incremental Adaptation: Extending Existing Production Practices  134 

Managing Climate Risk: New Strategies for Novel Uncertainty  136 

Conclusions  137 

Risk Assessment and Climate Change: An overview  137 

Table of Contents 


Chapter 8: Conclusions and Research Needs  139 

Exposure to Changing Climate Conditions  140 

Sensitivity to Changing Climate Conditions  140 

Capacity of the Agricultural System to Adapt to Changing Climate Conditions  142 

Research Needs  143 

Understanding Exposure  144 

Understanding Sensitivity  144 

Enhancing Adaptive Capacity  145 

Understanding Basic Processes  145 

Climate Change and Sustainable Agriculture  146 

Appendix A: References Cited (by Chapter)  147 

Chapter 1 References  147 

Chapter 2 References  147 

Chapter 3 References  148 

Chapter 4 References  149 

Chapter 5 References  155 

Chapter 6 References  172 

Chapter 7 References  174 

Chapter 8 References  179 

Appendix B: Glossary of Commonly Used Terms  181 

Appendix C: Report Authors and Affiliations  184 

Table of Contents 


Climate Change and Agriculture in the United States: 
Effects and Adaptation 

Executive Summary 


Key Messages 

Increases of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), 
rising temperatures, and altered precipitation 
patterns will affect agricultural productivity. 
Increases in temperature coupled with more variable 
precipitation will reduce productivity of crops, and 
these effects will outweigh the benefits of increasing 
carbon dioxide. Effects will vary among annual and 
perennial crops, and regions of the United States; 
however, all production systems will be affected to 
some degree by climate change. Agricultural systems 
depend upon reliable water sources, and the pattern 
and potential magnitude of precipitation changes is 
not well understood, thus adding considerable uncertainty 
to assessment efforts. 

Livestock production systems are vulnerable to 
temperature stresses. An animals ability to adjust 
its metabolic rate to cope with temperature extremes 
can lead to reduced productivity and in extreme cases 
death. Prolonged exposure to extreme temperatures 
will also further increase production costs and productivity 
losses associated with all animal products, 
e.g., meat, eggs, and milk. 

Projections for crops and livestock production 
systems reveal that climate change effects over the 
next 25 years will be mixed. The continued degree 
of change in the climate by midcentury and beyond is 
expected to have overall detrimental effects on most 
crops and livestock. 

Climate change will exacerbate current biotic 
stresses on agricultural plants and animals. 
Changing pressures associated with weeds, diseases, 
and insect pests, together with potential changes in 
timing and coincidence of pollinator lifecycles, will 
affect growth and yields. The potential magnitude of 
these effects is not yet well understood. For example, 
while some pest insects will thrive under increasing 
air temperatures, warming temperatures may 
force others out of their current geographical ranges. 
Several 
weeds have shown a greater response to 
carbon dioxide relative to crops; understanding these 
physiological and genetic responses may help guide 
future enhancements to weed management. 

Agriculture is dependent on a wide range of ecosystem 
processes that support productivity including 
maintenance of soil quality and regulation 
of water quality and quantity. Multiple stressors, 
including climate change, increasingly compromise 
the ability of ecosystems to provide these services. 
Key near-term climate change effects on agricultural 
soil and water resources include the potential for 
increased soil erosion through extreme precipitation 
events, as well as regional and seasonal changes in 
the availability of water resources for both rain-fed 
and irrigated agriculture. 

The predicted higher incidence of extreme 
weather events will have an increasing influence 
on agricultural productivity. Extremes matter 
because agricultural productivity is driven largely by 
environmental conditions during critical threshold 
periods of crop and livestock development. Improved 
assessment of climate change effects on agricultural 
productivity requires greater integration of extreme 
events into crop and economic models. 

The vulnerability of agriculture to climatic change 
is strongly dependent on the responses taken by 

Fig. 1. Storm gathers over farmland. Image courtesy UCAR. 


humans to moderate the effects of climate change. 
Adaptive actions within agricultural sectors are driven 
by perceptions of risk, direct productivity effects of 
climate change, and by complex changes in domestic 
and international markets, policies, and other 
institutions as they respond to those effects within 
the United States and worldwide. Opportunities for 
adaptation are shaped by the operating context within 
which decision.making occurs, access to effective 
adaptation options, and the capacity of individuals 
and institutions to take adaptive action as climate conditions 
change. Effective adaptive action across the 
multiple dimensions of the U.S. agricultural system 
offers potential to capitalize on emerging opportunities 
and minimize the costs associated with climate 
change. A climate-ready U.S. agriculture will depend 
on the development of geographically specific, agriculturally 
relevant, climate projections for the near 
and medium term; effective adaptation planning and 
assessment strategies; and soil, crop and livestock 
management practices that enhance agricultural production 
system resilience to climatic variability and 
extremes. Anticipated adaptation to climate change 
in production agriculture includes adjustments to 
production system inputs, tillage, crop species, crop 
rotations, and harvest strategies. New research and 
development in new crop varieties that are more resistant 
to drought, disease, and heat stress will increase 
the resilience of agronomic systems to climate change 
and will enable exploitation of opportunities that may 
arise. 

Over the last 150 years, U.S. agriculture has 
exhibited a remarkable capacity to adapt to a wide 
diversity of growing conditions amid dynamic 
social and economic changes. These adaptations 
were made during a period of relative climatic stability 
and abundant technical, financial and natural 
resources. Future agricultural adaptation will be 
undertaken in a decision environment characterized 
by high complexity and uncertainty driven by the 
sensitivity of agricultural system response to climatic 
variability, the complexity of interactions between 
the agricultural systems, non-climate stressors and 
the global climate system, and the increasing pace 
and intensity of climatic change. New approaches 
to managing the uncertainty associated with climate 
change, such as integrated assessment of climate 
change effects and adaptation options, the use of 
adaptive management and robust decision-support 
strategies, the integration of climate knowledge into 
decisionmaking by producers, technical advisors, 
and agricultural research and development planning 
efforts, and the development of resilient agricultural 
production systems will help to sustain agricultural 
production during the 21st century. 

Introduction 

Agriculture in the United States produces 
approximately $300 billion a year in commodities 
with livestock accounting for roughly half the value. 
Production of these commodities is vulnerable to 
climate change through the direct (i.e., abiotic) 
effects of changing climate conditions on crop and 
livestock development and yield (e.g., changes in 
temperature or precipitation), as well as through the 
indirect (i.e., biotic) effects arising from changes 
in the severity of pest pressures, availability 
of pollination services, and performance of 
other ecosystem services that affect agricultural 
productivity. Thus, U.S. agriculture exists as a 
complex web of interactions between agricultural 
productivity, ecosystem services, and climate change. 

Climate change poses unprecedented challenges 
to U.S. agriculture because of the sensitivity of 
agricultural productivity and costs to changing 
climate conditions. Adaptive action offers the 
potential to manage the effects of climate change by 
altering patterns of agricultural activity to capitalize 
on emerging opportunities while minimizing the 
costs associated with negative effects. The aggregate 
effects of climate change will ultimately depend on a 
complex web of adaptive responses to local climate 
stressors. These adaptive responses may range 
from farmers adjusting planting patterns and soil 
management practices in response to more variable 
weather patterns, to seed producers investing in 
the development of drought-tolerant varieties, to 
increased demand for Federal risk management 
programs, to adjustments in international trade as 
nations respond to food security concerns. Potential 
adaptive behavior can occur at multiple levels in 
a highly diverse international agricultural system 
including production, consumption, education, 
research, services, and governance. Understanding 
the complexity of such interactions is critical for 
developing effective adaptive strategies. 

The U.S. agricultural system is expected to be 
fairly resilient to climate change in the short term 
due to the systems flexibility to engage in adaptive 
behaviors such as expansion of irrigated acreage, 
regional shifts in acreage for specific crops, crop 
rotations, changes to management decisions such as 
choice and timing of inputs and cultivation practices, 
and altered trade patterns compensating for yield 
changes caused by changing climate patterns. By 
midcentury, when temperature increases are expected 
to exceed 1C to 3C and precipitation extremes 
intensify, yields of major U.S. crops and farm returns 
are projected to decline. However, the simulation 
studies underlying such projections often fail to 

Executive Summary 

Climate change 
poses unprecedented 
challenges to U.S. 
agriculture because of the 
sensitivity of agricultural 
productivity and costs 
to changing climate 
conditions. 


incorporate production constraints caused by changes 
of pest pressures, ecosystem services and conditions 
that limit adaptation that can significantly increase 
production costs and yield losses. 

Crop Response to Changing Climate 

Plant response to climate change is dictated by a 
complex set of interactions to CO2, temperature, 
solar radiation, and precipitation. Each crop species 
has a given set of temperature thresholds that define 
the upper and lower boundaries for growth and 
reproduction, along with optimum temperatures 
for each developmental phase. Plants are currently 
grown in areas in which they are exposed to 
temperatures that match their threshold values. 
As temperatures increase over the next century, 
shifts may occur in crop production areas because 
temperatures will no longer occur within the range, 
or during the critical time period for optimal growth 
and yield of grain or fruit. 

For example, one critical period of exposure to 
temperatures is the pollination stage, when pollen is 
released to fertilize the plant and trigger development 
of reproductive organs, for fruit, grain, or fiber. Such 
thresholds are typically cooler for each crop than 
the thresholds and optima for growth. Pollination 
is one of the most sensitive stages to temperatures, 
and exposure to high temperatures during this period 
can greatly reduce crop yields and increase the 
risk of total crop failure. Plants exposed to warm 
nighttime temperatures during grain, fiber, or fruit 
production also experience lower productivity and 
reduced quality. Increasing temperatures cause 
plants to mature and complete their stages of 
development faster, which may alter the feasibility 
and profitability of regional crop rotations and field 
management options, including double-cropping and 
use of cover crops. Faster growth may create smaller 
plants, because soil may not be able to supply water 
or nutrients at required rates, thereby reducing 
grain, forage, fruit, or fiber production. Increasing 
temperatures also increase the rate of water use 
by plants, causing more water stress in areas with 
variable precipitation. Estimated reductions in solar 
radiation in agricultural areas over the last 60 years 
are projected to continue due to increased cloud 
cover and radiative scattering caused by atmospheric 
aerosols. Such reductions may partially offset the 
temperature-induced acceleration of plant growth. 
For vegetables, exposure to temperatures in the 
range of 1C to 4C above optimal for biomass 
growth moderately reduces yield, and exposure to 
temperatures more than 5C to 7C above optimal 
often leads to severe, if not total, production losses. 
While many agricultural enterprises have the option 
to respond to climate changes by shifting crop 
selection, development of new cultivars in perennial 
specialty crops commonly requires 15 to 30 or more 
years, greatly limiting that sectors opportunity to 
adapt by shifting cultivars unless cultivars can be 
introduced from other areas. 

An increase in winter temperatures also affects 
perennial cropping systems through interactions 
with plant chilling requirements. All perennial 
specialty crops have a winter chilling requirement 
(typically expressed as hours below 10C and above 
0C) ranging from 200 to 2,000 cumulative hours. 
Yields will decline if the chilling requirement is 
not completely satisfied because flower emergence 
and viability will be low. Projected air temperature 
increases for California, for example, may prevent 
the chilling requirements for fruit and nut trees by 
the middle to the end of the 21st century. In the 
Northeast United States, perennial crops with a 
lower 400-hour chilling requirement will continue 
to be met for most of the Northeast during this 
century, but crops with prolonged cold requirements 
(1,000 or more hours) could demonstrate reduced 
yields, particularly in southern sections of the 
Northeast. Climate change affects winter temperature 
variability, as well; mid-winter warming can lead 
to early bud-burst or bloom of some perennial 
plants, resulting in frost damage when cold winter 
temperatures return. 

Increasing carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere 
is a positive for plant growth, and controlled 
experiments have documented that elevated CO2 
concentrations can increase plant growth while 
decreasing soil water-use rates. The effects of 
elevated CO2 on grain and fruit yield and quality, 
however, are mixed; reduced nitrogen and protein 
content observed in some nitrogen-fixing plants 
causes a reduction in grain and forage quality. This 
effect reduces the ability of pasture and rangeland 
to support grazing livestock. The magnitude of 
the growth stimulation effect of elevated CO2 
concentrations under field conditions, in conjunction 
with changing water and nutrient constraints, is 
uncertain. Because elevated CO2 concentrations 
disproportionately stimulate growth of weed species, 
they are likely to contribute to increased risk of crop 
loss from weed pressure. 

The effects of elevated CO2 on water-use efficiency 
may be an advantage for areas with limited 
precipitation. Other changing climate conditions may 
either offset or complement such effects. Warming 
temperatures, for instance, will act to increase crop 
water demand, increasing the rate of water use by 

Executive Summary 


crops. Crops grown on soils with a limiting soil 
water-holding capacity are likely to experience an 
increased risk of drought and potential crop failure 
as a result of temperature-induced increases in 
crop water demand, even with improved water-use 
efficiencies. Conversely, declining trends of nearsurface 
winds over the last several decades and 
projections for future declines of winds may decrease 
evapotranspiration of cropping regions. 

Crops and forage plants will continue to be subjected 
to increasing temperatures, increasing CO2, and 
more variable water availability caused by changing 
precipitation patterns. These factors interact in 
their effect on plant growth and yield. A balanced 
understanding of the consequences of management 
actions and genetic responses to these factors will 
form the basis for more resilient production systems 
to climate change. Due to the complexities of these 
relationships, integrated research and development 
of management practices, plant genetics, 
hydrometeorology, socio-economics, and agronomy 
is necessary to enable successful agricultural 
adaptation to climate change. 

Livestock Response to Changing 
Climate 

Animal agriculture is a major component of the U.S. 
agricultural system. Changing climatic conditions 
affect animal agriculture in four primary ways: (1) 
feed-grain production, availability and price; (2) 
pastures and forage crop production and quality; 
(3) animal health, growth and reproduction; and 
(4) disease and pest distributions. The optimal 
environmental conditions for livestock production 
include a range of temperatures and other 
environmental conditions for which the animal 
does not need to significantly alter behavior or 
physiological functions to maintain a relatively 
constant core body temperature. Optimum animal 
core body temperature is often maintained within a 
2C to 3C range. For many species, deviations of 
core body temperature in excess of 2C to 3C cause 
disruptions of performance, production, and fertility 
that limit an animals ability to produce meat, milk, 
or eggs. Deviations of 5C to 7C often result 
in death. For cattle that breed during spring and 
summer, exposure to high temperatures decreases 
conception rates. Livestock and dairy production 
may be more affected by changes in the number of 
days of extreme heat than by adjustments of average 
temperature. The combined effect of temperature and 
humidity affect animal response and are quantified 
through the thermal-humidity index. 

Livestock production systems that provide partial 
or total shelter to mitigate thermal environmental 
challenges can reduce the risk and vulnerability 
associated with adverse weather events. Livestock 
such as poultry and swine are generally managed 
in housed systems where airflow can be controlled 
and housing temperature modified to minimize or 
buffer against adverse environmental conditions. 
However, management and energy costs associated 
with increased temperature regulation will increase 
for confined production enterprises. Protection of 
animals against exposure to high temperatures will 
require modification of shelter and perhaps even 
methods of increasing cooling. 

Warmer, more humid conditions will also have 
indirect effects on animal health and productivity 
through promotion of insect growth and spread 
of diseases. Such effects may be substantial; 
however, exact relationships between climate 
change and vectors of animal health are not well 
understood. Climate affects microbial populations 
and distribution, the distribution of vector-borne 
diseases, host resistance to infections, food and 
water shortages, and food-borne diseases. Earlier 
springs and warmer winters may enable greater 
proliferation and survivability of pathogens and 
parasites. Regional warming and changes of rainfall 
distribution may lead to changes in the spatial 
or temporal distributions of diseases sensitive to 
temperature and moisture, such as anthrax, blackleg, 
hemorrhagic septicemia, as well as increased 
incidence of ketosis, mastitis and lameness in dairy 
cows. 

Effects of Climate Change on Soil and 
Water 

Climate change effects on agriculture also include the 
effects of changing climate conditions on resources 
of key importance to agricultural production, such 
as soil and water. Seasonal precipitation affects 
the potential amount of water available for crop 
production, but the actual amount of water available 
to plants also depends upon soil type, soil waterholding 
capacity, and infiltration rate. Healthy soils 
have characteristics that include appropriate levels 
of nutrients necessary for the production of healthy 
plants, moderately high levels of organic matter, a 
soil structure with good aggregation of the primary 
soil particles and macro-porosity, moderate pH 
levels, thickness sufficient to store adequate water for 
plants, a healthy microbial community, and absence 
of elements or compounds in concentrations toxic for 
plant, animal, and microbial life. Several processes 
act to degrade soils including, erosion, compaction, 

Executive Summary 

Climate affects 
microbial populations 
and distribution, the 
distribution of vectorborne 
diseases, host 
resistance to infections, 
food and water shortages, 
and food-borne diseases. 


acidification, salinization, toxification, and net loss of 
organic matter. 

Several of these processes are sensitive to changing 
climate conditions. Changes to the rate of soil 
organic matter accumulation will be affected 
by climate through soil temperature, soil water 
availability, and the amount of organic matter 
input from plants. Erosion is of particular concern. 
Changing climate will contribute to the erosivity 
from rainfall, snowmelt, and wind. Rainfalls erosive 
power will increase if increases in rainfall amount 
are accompanied by increases of intensity. Shifts 
of rainfall intensity have begun to occur in the 
United States with more extreme events expected 
for the future. Although there is a general lack of 
knowledge about the rates of soil erosion associated 
with snowmelt or rain-on-thawing-soil erosion, if 
decreased days of snowfall translate to increased 
days of rainfall, erosion by storm runoff is likely to 
increase. 

Changes in production practices can also have effects 
on soil erosion that may be greater than other effects 
of climate change. Tillage intensity, crop selection, 
as well as planting and harvest dates can significantly 
affect runoff and soil loss. Though the magnitude of 
these effects is still highly uncertain, studies have 
shown potential for significant increases of erosion 
loss, in part due to a reduction of projected crop 
biomass, which results in less overwintering residue 
available to protect the soil. As soil erosion changes 
under climate change, so does the potential for 
associated, off-site, non-point-source pollution. Soil 
conservation practices will therefore be an important 
element of agricultural adaptation to climate change. 

Changing climate conditions over the coming 
decades will also significantly affect water resources, 
with broad implications for the U.S. crop sector. 
Climate change will affect surface-water resources, 
which account for 58% of water withdrawals for 
irrigated production nationally. Rising temperatures 
and shifting precipitation patterns will alter cropwater 
requirements, crop-water availability, crop 
productivity, and costs of water access across the 
agricultural landscape. Temperature and precipitation 
shifts are expected to alter the volume and timing of 
storm and snowmelt runoff to surface water bodies. 
Annual streamflow may increase in the northern and 
eastern United States, where annual precipitation 
is projected to increase. Precipitation declines for 
regions such as the Southwest and Southern Plains 
will result in reduced streamflow and a shift of 
seasonal flow volumes to the wetter winter months in 
areas already dominated by irrigation. 

Climate change effects on snowpack have important 
implications for surface-water availability and stored 
water reserves, particularly in the West, where much 
of the surface-water runoff comes from mountain 
snowmelt. Higher temperatures will continue to 
restrict the snow storage season, resulting in reduced 
snow accumulations and earlier spring snowmelt. 
Stored water reserves are projected to decline in 
many river basins, especially during critical summer 
growing season months when crop-water demands 
are greatest. As a result, agriculture may become 
increasingly water constrained across the central 
and southern portions of the Mountain and Pacific 
Southwest regions, while projected precipitation 
increases in the Northern Rockies and Pacific 
Northwest could improve surface-water supplies for 
those areas. 

The effect of precipitation changes on surface-water 
flows may be offset or compounded by temperatureinduced 
shifts of potential evapotranspiration. 
Higher temperatures are projected to increase both 
evaporative losses from land and water surfaces, 
and transpiration losses from non-crop land cover, 
potentially reducing annual runoff and streamflow. 
The resulting shifts of water stress, crop yields, and 
crop competitiveness, in turn, will drive changes of 
cropland allocations and production systems within 
and across regions. 

Groundwater is a primary water source for irrigation 
in the Plains States and an important irrigation water 
supply for the Eastern United States, as well as areas 
of the Mountain and Pacific West regions. While 
groundwater aquifers are generally less influenced in 
the short term by weather patterns, changing climate 
effects on precipitation, streamflow, and soil water 
evaporation can affect groundwater systems over 
time through changes in groundwater recharge. 

Extreme Events 

Climate change projections into the future suggest 
an increased variability of temperature and 
precipitation. Extreme climate conditions, such 
as dry spells, sustained drought, and heat waves 
can have large effects on crops and livestock. 
Although climate models are limited in their ability 
to accurately project the occurrence and timing 
of individual extreme events, emerging patterns 
project increased incidence of areas experiencing 
droughts and periods of more intense precipitation. 
The occurrence of very hot nights and the duration 
of very low (agriculturally insignificant) rainfall 
events are projected to increase by the end of the 
21st century. The timing of extreme events relative to 

Executive Summary 

Changes in production 
practices can also have 
effects on soil erosion 
that may be greater than 
other effects of climate 
change. Tillage intensity, 
crop selection, as well 
as planting and harvest 
dates can significantly 
affect runoff and soil loss. 


sensitive phenological stages could affect growth and 
productivity. 

Crops and livestock production will be affected by 
increased exposure to extreme temperature events 
and increased risk of exceeding the maximum 
temperature thresholds, potentially leading to 
catastrophic losses. Ruminants, including, goats, 
sheep, beef cattle and dairy cattle tend to be managed 
in more extensive outdoor facilities. Within limits, 
these animals can adapt to and cope with gradual 
thermal changes, though shifts in thermoregulation 
may result in a loss of productivity. Lack of prior 
conditioning to rapidly changing or adverse weather 
events, however, often results in catastrophic deaths 
of domestic livestock and losses of productivity by 
surviving animals. 

Adaptation 

U.S. agriculture has demonstrated a remarkable 
adaptive capacity over the last 150 years. Crop and 
livestock production systems expanded across a 
diversity of growing conditions, responded to variations 
in climate and other natural resources, and to 
dynamic changes in agricultural knowledge, technology, 
markets, and, most recently, public demands for 
sustainable production of agricultural products. This 
adaptive capacity has been driven largely by public 
sector investment in agricultural research, development, 
and extension activities made during a period 
of climatic stability and abundant technical, financial, 
and natural resource availability. 

Climate change presents an unprecedented challenge 
to the adaptive capacity of U.S. agriculture. Current 
climate change effects are increasing the complexity 
and uncertainty of agricultural management. 
Projected climate changes over the next century may 
require major adjustments to production practices, 
particularly for production systems operating at 
their marginal limits of climate. Because agricultural 
systems are human-dominated ecosystems, 
the vulnerability of agriculture to climatic change is 
strongly dependent not just on the biophysical effects 
of climate change, but also on the responses taken by 
humans to moderate those effects within the United 
States and worldwide. Effective adaptive action 
undertaken by the multiple dimensions of the U.S. 
agricultural system offers potential for capitalizing 
on the opportunities presented by climate change, 
and minimizing the costs via avoidance or reduction 
of the severity of detrimental effects from changing 
climate. 

Vulnerability and adaptive capacity are characteristics 
of human and natural systems, are dynamic and 
multi-dimensional, and are influenced by complex 
interactions among social, economic, and environmental 
factors. Adaptive decisions are shaped by 
the operating context within which decision are 
made (for example, existing natural resource quality 
and non-climate stressors, government policy and 
programs), access to effective adaptation options, 
and the individual capability to take adaptive action. 
Adaptation strategies in use today by U.S. farmers 
coping with current changes in weather variability 
include changing cultivar selection or timing of field 
operations, and increased use of pesticides to control 
higher pest pressures. In Californias Central Valley, 
an adaptation plan consisting of integrated changes in 
crop mix, irrigation methods, fertilization practices, 
tillage practices, and land management was found to 
be the most effective approach to managing climate 
risk. Adaptation options for managing novel crop 
pest management challenges may involve increased 
use of pesticides, new strategies for preventing rapid 
evolution of pest resistance to chemical control 
agents, the development of new pesticide products 
and improved pest and disease forecasting. Adaptation 
options that increase the resilience of agricultural 
systems to increased pest pressures include crop 
diversification and the management of biodiversity 
at both field and landscape scale to suppress pest 
outbreaks and pathogen transmission. Given the 
projected effects of climate change, some U.S. agricultural 
systems will have to undergo more transformative 
changes to remain productive and profitable. 

 Adaptation measures such as developing drought, 
pest, and heat stress resistance in crops and animals, 
diversifying crop rotations, integrating livestock with 
crop production systems, improving soil quality, 
minimizing off-farm flow of nutrients and pesticides, 
and other practices typically associated with 
sustainable agriculture are actions that may increase 
the capacity of the agricultural system to minimize 
the effects of climate change on productivity. For 
example, developing drought and heat stress resistant 
crops will improve the ability of farmers to cope with 
increasing frequencies of temperature and precipitation 
variability. Similarly, production practices that 
enhance the ability of healthy soils to regulate water 
resource dynamics at the farm and watershed scales 
will be particularly critical for the maintenance of 
crop and livestock productivity under conditions of 
variable and extreme weather events. Enhancing the 
resilience of agriculture to climate change through 
adaptation strategies that promote the development 
of sustainable agriculture is a common multiplebenefit 
recommendation for agricultural adaptation 
planning. 

Executive Summary 


National agricultural adaptation planning has only 
recently begun in the United States and elsewhere. 
Broad policy measures that may enhance the adaptive 
capacity of agriculture include strengthening 
climate-sensitive assets, integrating adaptation into 
all relevant government policies, and addressing 
non-climate stressors that degrade adaptive capacity. 
Because of the uncertainties associated with climate 
change effects on agriculture and the complexity of 
adaptation processes, adaptive management strategies 
that facilitate implementation and the continual 
evaluation and revision of adaptation strategies as 
climate learning proceeds will be necessary to ensure 
agricultural systems remain viable with climate 
change. Synergies between mitigation and adaptation 
planning are also possible through the use of coherent 
climate policy frameworks that link issues such 
as carbon sequestration, greenhouse gas emissions, 
land-use change, regional water management, and 
the long-term sustainability of production systems. 

High adaptive capacity does not guarantee successful 
adaptation to climate change. Adaptation assessment 
and planning efforts routinely encounter conditions 
that limit adaptive action regardless of the adaptive 
capacity of the system under study. Potential 
constraints to adaptation can arise from ecological, 
social and economic conditions that are dynamic 
and vary greatly within and across economic sectors, 
communities, regions, and countries. 

Adapting agricultural systems to dramatic changes 
in the physical environment may be limited by 
social factors such as values, beliefs, or world views. 
Those factors can be affected by access to finance, 
political norms and values, and culture and religious 
ideologies. 

Other limits to adaptation include the availability of 
critical inputs such as land and water, and constraints 
to farm financing and credit availability. These constraints 
may be substantial, especially for agricultural 
enterprises with little available capital or those 
without the financial capacity to withstand increasing 
variability of production and returns, including 
catastrophic loss. Differential capacity for adaptation, 
together with the variable effects of climate change 
on yield, creates significant concerns about agricultural 
productivity and food security. 

Research Needs 

 The research needs identified in this report are categorized 
within a vulnerability framework and address 
specific actions that would serve to improve understanding 
of the exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive 
capacity of U.S. agriculture to climate change. 
Attention to these research needs will enhance the 
ability of the U.S. agriculture sector to anticipate 
and respond to the challenges presented by changing 
climate conditions. 

Some broad research needs include the following: 

 Improve projections of future climate conditions 
for time scales of seasons to multiple decades; 
enable more precise projections of the changes 
and durations of average and extreme temperatures, 
precipitation, and related variables (e.g., 
evapotranspiration, soil moisture). 

 Evaluate and develop process-level understanding 
of the sensitivity of plant and animal production 
systems, including insect, weed, pathogen, soil 
and water components, to key direct, indirect and 
interacting effects of climate change effects. 

 Develop and extend the knowledge, management 
strategies and tools needed by U.S. agricultural 
stakeholders to enhance the adaptive capacity of 
plant and animal production systems to climate 
variability and extremes. While existing management 
and agronomic options have demonstrated 
significant capacity for expanding adaptation 
opportunities, new adaptive management strategies, 
robust risk management approaches, and 
breeding and genetic advances offer much potential, 
but have yet to be evaluated. 

Understanding Exposure 

The vulnerability of an agricultural system to climate 
change is dependent in part on the character, magnitude 
and rate of climate variation to which a system 
is exposed. Effective adaptation will be enhanced by 
research to: 

 Improve projections of future climate conditions 
for time scales of seasons to multiple decades, 
including more precise information about changes 
of average and extreme temperatures, precipitation, 
and related variables (e.g., evapotranspiration, 
soil moisture). Such projections are needed 
to better understand exposure to climate risks, 
and support effective assessment, planning, and 
decisionmaking across the multiple dimensions of 
the U.S. agricultural system. 

 Enable projection of future climate conditions 
at finer temporal scales (hourly and daily versus 
weekly, monthly, or annual averages) and spatial 
scales (1-10 km, as opposed to 50-100 km). This 
finer-scale information would permit decision


Executive Summary 

Adapting agricultural 
systems to dramatic 
changes in the physical 
environment may be 
limited by social factors 
such as values, beliefs, or 
world views. Those factors 
can be affected by access 
to finance, political norms 
and values, and culture 
and religious ideologies. 


makers to examine the potential effects of climate 
change on specific crop and livestock production 
systems in specific regions. There is also a need 
to include more precise decadal-scale projections 
to integrate climate information into longer 
term planning and improved information about 
the probability of potential changes to effectively 
manage climate risks. 

 Develop modeling systems that produce climate 
and effects projections through the use of standard 
socioeconomic scenarios and access to more accurate 
and comprehensive observations of climate 
change and its effects on agricultural systems. 
Improve process-level understanding and validate 
model simulations. 

 Improve the accuracy and range of weather 
predictions (as opposed to longer term, scenariodependent 
climate projections) and seasonal forecasts. 
Better forecasts are needed to understand 
near-term exposure and support tactical decisionmaking 
at all levels of the agricultural system. 
Improved forecasting is particularly critical 
given the expected increases in the variability of 
weather and the incidence of extreme conditions. 

Understanding Sensitivity 

The nature and degree of response to key climate 
change drivers determines the sensitivity of the 
agricultural system to climate change effects. Critical 
thresholds, feedbacks, and synergies operating 
at multiple temporal and spatial scales complicate 
efforts to assess agricultural system sensitivity to climate 
change. Effective adaptation to climate change 
will be enhanced by research to: 

 Improve understanding of both direct and indirect 
climate change effects and their interactions on 
plant and animal production systems, together 
with new tools for exploring their dynamic interactions 
throughout the multiple dimensions of the 
U.S. agricultural sector; 

 Enhance capabilities to quantify and screen plant 
and animal response to water and temperature 
extremes; 

 Improve understanding of climate change effects 
on the natural and biological resources upon 
which agricultural productivity depends, particularly 
soil and water resources; 

 Improve understanding of climate change effects 
on existing agricultural landscape patterns and 
production practices; 

 Improve understanding of the economic impacts 
of climate change and how those impacts are 
distributed. 

 Develop improved integrated assessment models 
and ecosystem manipulation sites to enable 
experiments that examine the impacts of simultaneous 
interacting multiple stresses on plant and 
animal production systems. 

Enhancing Adaptive Capacity 

Because agricultural systems are human-dominated 
ecosystems, the vulnerability of agriculture to climate 
change is strongly dependent on the responses 
taken by humans to adapt to climate change effects. 
The adaptive capacity of U.S. agriculture will be 
enhanced by research to: 

 Improve understanding of the key determinants 
(social, economic, and ecological) of adaptive 
capacity and resilience in agricultural systems; 

 Develop effective methods for the assessment of 
adaptive capacity; 

 Identify and extend information about existing 
best management practices that offer no-regrets 
and low regrets adaptation options; 

 Develop resilient crop and livestock production 
systems and the socio-economic and cultural/institutional 
structures needed to support them; 

 Develop, assess, and extend adaptive management 
strategies and climate risk management tools 
to improve decisionmaking throughout the U.S. 
agricultural sector; 

 Improve understanding of the social limits to 
adaptation, including the effects of cost/benefit 
considerations, technological feasibility, beliefs, 
values and attitudes, and resource constraints on 
adaptive response. 

 Develop effective methods of adaptation planning 
and assessment useful to decisionmakers operating 
throughout the multiple dimensions of the 
U.S. agricultural system. 

Executive Summary 


9 

Strong scientific consensus highlights that anthropogenic 
effects of climate change are already 
occurring and will be substantial (Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change 2007a). U.S. 
agriculture is a multi-billion-dollar industry that stands 
to be significantly influenced by the effects of climate 
change. This document presents an overview of the 
latest research available related to climate change 
impacts on U.S. agriculture and the potential options 
for adaptation in the agricultural sector. Building upon 
the extensive scientific literature, the impacts and risks 
of climate change, climate variability, and adaptation 
options for managed and unmanaged ecosystems and 
their constituent biota and processes are considered. 
The report also highlights changes in resource conditions 
that scientific studies suggest are most likely to 
occur in response to climate change. 

Today, the United States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) classifies 116 plant commodity groups as 
agricultural products, as well as four livestock groupings 
(beef cattle, dairy, poultry, and swine) and products 
derived from animal production, e.g., cheese or 
eggs. U.S. crops and livestock varieties are grown 
in diverse climates, regions, and soils. No matter the 
region, however, weather and climate characteristics 
such as temperature, precipitation, carbon dioxide 
(CO2), and water availability directly affect the health 
and well-being of plants and livestock, as well as 
pasture and rangeland production. The distribution of 
crops and livestock is also determined by the climatic 
resources for a given region, and U.S. agriculture has 
benefited from optimizing the adaptive areas of crops 
and livestock. For any commodity, variation in yield 
between years is related to growing-season weather 
effects. These effects also influence how insects, 
disease, and weeds affect agricultural production. 

Report Goals and Scope 

Within this report, information is presented 
that enables framing and evaluation of existing 
vulnerabilities 
of U.S agriculture to climate change 
and adaptation strategies. Timeframes for the assessments 
are the present, 25 years in future, and 90 years 
in future. This report focuses particularly on the near 
future, because the climate projections are relatively 
more certain and address more immediate planning 
and management needs for crops, livestock, economic 
needs, and risk concerns, among other considerations. 
However, projections and expectations are considered 
out to the centurys end, in some cases. 

This technical document builds on the 2008 report, 
The Effects of Climate Change on Agriculture, Land 
Resources, Water Resources, and Biodiversity (CCSP 
2008). While including up-to-date scientific analysis 
of the subjects included in that assessment, e.g., temperature 
and precipitation effects on crop and animal 
agriculture, this report builds on the earlier report 
in three important ways by covering climate change 
adaptation processes, looking at the economic effects 
of changing climate, and including new findings on 
the indirect (biotic) effects of climate change on U.S. 
agriculture. 

U.S. landscapes include a mosaic of agricultural, 
urban, and wildland ecosystems. Within this mosaic, 
agricultural components play a large role in how 
climate change affects natural resources (water, 
soil, and air). Responses, whether environmental or 
economic, to changing climate are termed adaptations 
and play an important role in how climate 
change will influence agricultural landscapes and 
management needs. Equally important to adaptive 
changes are considerations related to the economics 
of changes in climate, e.g., how climate influences 
agricultural 
production economics, how 
economically driven choices influence agricultural 
management 
decisions, and how such decisions 
influence 
climate effects on the landscape. The last of 
the three advances on the earlier report is inclusion 



Chapter 1 

U.S. Agriculture and Climate 

The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present. The occasion is piled high with 
difficulty, and we must rise with the occasion. As our case is new, so we must think anew, and act anew. 

Abraham Lincoln, 1862* 

* This quote is from Lincolns 2nd State of the Union Address. 
In this address, he also announced the creation of USDA. 


of new scientific findings related to how changes 
in temperature and precipitation may affect pests, 
weeds, and disease, and how those changes play out 
in agricultural systems. 

This technical assessment was driven by the following 
questions: 

1. How does a changing climate directly influence 
agriculture? 

2. What non-climate stresses need to be considered 
in interpreting climate change effects on U.S. 
agriculture? 

3. How do economic factors respond to climate or 
alter the effects of climate change in agricultural 
systems? 

4. How might agricultural decisionmakers take 
adaptive actions that capitalize on the opportunities 
and minimize or avoid the negative effects on 
production under changing climate conditions? 

The mitigation of greenhouse gases (GHGs), either 
by reducing atmospheric emissions or through 
removal by various biological or technological 
means, including carbon sequestration in soils, is 
not within the scope of this report. A recent review 
of greenhouse gas mitigation can be found in Task 
Force Report 142, Carbon Sequestration and 
Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in Agriculture: Challenges 
and Opportunities by the Council for Agricultural 
Science and Technology (2011). 

Document Organization 

This document consists of seven chapters, as well as 
an Executive Summary and three appendices. This 
chapter, the Introduction, is intended to help orient 
the reader to the report. Chapter 2, An Overview of 
U.S. Agriculture, presents the context of U.S. agriculture. 
Chapter 3, An Overview of the Effects of Changing 
Climate on U.S. Agriculture, discuss global and 
national effects of climate change, and how these 
manifest within the national agroecosystem. Chapter 
4, Climate Change Science and Agriculture, reviews 
the scientific literature on direct and indirect effects 
of climate change on agriculture and introduces a 
number of non-climate stressors that have effects on 
crops or livestock that change our understanding of 
climate changes relationship to agriculture. Chapter 
5, Climate Change Effects on U.S. Agricultural 
Production, addresses the aggregate effects of climate 
change on specific cropping systems, livestock 
production, soils, and water and ecosystem services, 
including water resources for agriculture. Chapter 
6, Climate Change Effects on the Economics of U.S. 
Agriculture, looks at the economic effects of climate 
change on agriculture, assesses economic risks due 
to changing climate, and considers economic means 
of adaptation under a changing climate. Chapter 7, 
Adapting to Climate Change, provides information 
on the adaptive capacity of agriculture. Chapter 8, 
Conclusions and Research Needs, expresses the 
authors conclusions based upon the findings within 
the report. 

Appendix A provides literature citations by chapter. 
Appendix B provides a glossary of terms used commonly 
in this report, and Appendix C lists the report 
authors and their affiliations. 

Authors 

This document was coordinated by the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture and composed by 60 authors 
from the Federal service, universities, non-governmental 
organizations, and private industry. Authors 
provide the depth of expertise required by the subject 
matter and the geographic diversity of the issues 
under consideration in this report. The lead author 
team includes Charles L. Walthall, Jerry Hatfield, 
Peter Backlund, Laura Lengnick, Elizabeth Marshall, 
and Margaret Walsh. 

The authors wish to thank Dr. John Reilly (Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology), Dr. Louise Jackson 
(University of California - Davis), Dr. David 
Schimel (National Ecological Observation Network), 
and John Antle (Oregon State University) for providing 
expert review of its contents, and members 
of the USDA Global Change Task Force for their 
comments. 

Chapter 1 

The National Climate Assessment 

Created under the leadership of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), some 
information for this report may be used for the 
National Climate Assessment (NCA). The NCA 
provides a status report on climate change 
science and the impacts of climate on sectors 
of the United States to the U.S. Congress and 
the President of the United States. The NCA is a 
comprehensive compilation of information on the 
state of climate and its effects on U.S. ecosystems, 
infrastructure, and society to enhance the ability 
of the United States to anticipate, mitigate, and 
adapt to changes in the global environment. 


Agriculture is a major economic sector within 
the United States, with more than 2 million 
farms covering about 900 million acres and 
gross annual farm income between $300 and $350 
billion. The farm sector  i.e., farmers, seed companies, 
and producers and distributors of agriculturally 
based products  has a long history of innovating 
and adapting to changing economic, environmental, 
regulatory, and climate conditions and has become 
much more productive over time. For example, in 
1910, U.S. farmers cultivated 330 million acres 
and supplied food and fiber to a population of 92.2 
million. By 2006, on the same cultivated land area, 
U.S. farmers supplied food and fiber to 297.5 million 
people. 

Agriculture in the United States is a dynamic, 
self-adjusting system that responds to changes or 
fluctuations in trade, policy, markets, technology, 
and climate. The United States is a global supplier 
of agricultural products. With agricultural exports 
totaling slightly less than $140 billion, and agricultural 
product imports totaling less than $90 billion, 
agriculture offers a net positive to the U.S. trade 
balance. In addition to crops and related agricultural 
goods, more than 200 different products from 
across the United States are produced from livestock; 
these account for slightly more than half of the total 
economic value of the agricultural sector. Common 
to all of these commodities is sensitivity to climate 
variability and change. 

Since 1900, U.S. farms have grown larger, more 
mechanized, less labor intensive, and more specialized. 
While the number of farms has fallen, the total 
amount of land used for agricultural practices has 
remained fairly constant, and production and productivity 
have increased dramatically. Today, agriculture 
accounts for a declining share of employment and 
gross domestic product (GDP) (Dmitri et al. 2005; 
Hoppe et al. 2007) (Figure 2.1), with U.S. farms 
generating less than 1% of total U.S. GDP as of 2007 
(ODonoghue et al. 2011). 

At the same time that average farm size has 
increased, U.S. farms have also become more specialized 
over time, concentrating on the production 
of fewer commodities per farm (Figure 2.2). Specialization 
offers both benefits and risks. Specialization 
allows the farmer to concentrate on particular areas 
of expertise and minimize the different types of capital 
investments and inputs required for production, 


Chapter 2 

An Overview of U.S. Agriculture 

Fig. 2.1. Farms, land in farms, and average acres per farm in the U.S. 18502007. Most of the decline in farms occurred 
between 1935 and 1974. The break in the lines reflects an adjustment in the methods employed by the Census of 
Agriculture. Source: USDA ERS 2002. 

 


while simultaneously making a farm more vulnerable 
to catastrophic loss of a particular crop due to 
insects, pathogens, or extreme weather events, for 
example (ODonoghue et al. 2011). Though specialization 
trends vary by sector, the smallest farms tend 
to be the most specialized, while larger farms generally 
produce a wider variety of commodities (Hoppe 
et al. 2007; Melhim et al. 2009a, b). 

Forces Affecting U.S. Agriculture 

A diverse set of forces have sculpted U.S. 
agriculture, including productivity increases, 
integration of national and global markets, and 
changing consumer demands for convenience, 
healthier products, and environmentally friendly 
production (Dmitri et al. 2005). A large part of the 
success of U.S. agriculture results from the dynamic, 
self-adjusting characteristics of the system, which 
responds constantly to changes or fluctuations in 
environmental conditions, trade, policy, markets, 
and technology. This capacity to react and adapt 
to shifting circumstances will be invaluable in the 
face of changing climate; however, the pace and 
intensity of projected climatic changes present novel 
challenges to U.S. agriculture. 

Economic Factors and U.S. Agriculture 

After remaining steady from 1982 to 2002, farm 
product prices since 2002 have trended upward 
(ODonoghue et al. 2011). However, these averages 
mask significant fluctuations; six major spikes of 
world crop prices have occurred since 1970, and 
producers regularly adapt production decisions to 
compensate for such price variability (Figure 2.3). 
Over the past decade, one of the most prominent 
characteristics of the domestic and world food 
system has been rare back-to-back price swings, 
first in 2007-2008, and then again during 2010- 
2011. While many factors contributed to these price 
swings, both occurrences were in part attributable to 
short-term, weather-driven yield shortages (Trostle 
et al. 2011). For example, 2010-2011 saw major 
drought effects on Russian and Chinese wheat 
production that, coupled with increased demand, 
increased prices. Severe weather in other nations 
affects the U.S. agricultural system because of the 
global scope of agricultural production. 

Chapter 2 


Fig. 2.2. As U.S. farms have become more specialized, the number of 
commodities produced per farm has decreased. Source: USDA ERS 2002. 


Fig. 2.3. Crop price spikes since 1970. The graph shows the weighted average of four crops (wheat, soybeans, corn and 
rice) based on IMF monthly export-weighted prices. Source: USDA ERS 2002. 


Producers employ a number of production, organizational, 
and marketing strategies to manage risks 
associated with farming (ODonoghue et al. 2011). 
For example, farmers use production and marketing 
contracts to ensure outlets for their products and 
to reduce exposure to price and production shocks. 
While the share of field crops under contract has 
remained steady at 25-30%, the share of production 
in the livestock sector under contract increased from 
33% from 1991-1993 to 50% between 2006 and 
2007 (ODonoghue et al. 2011). The share of field 
crops under contract may also be starting an upward 
trend, as one might expect due to recent volatility of 
field crop prices (Figure 2.4). Federal crop insurance 
is another increasingly important risk management 
tool, with the total number of insured acres up from 
100 million in 1989 to more than 270 million acres 
in 2007 (ODonoghue et al. 2011). Federal subsidies 
supporting the federal crop insurance program have 
increased at a similar rate, jumping from roughly 
$200 million in 1989 to more than $3.8 billion in 
2007 (ODonoghue et al. 2011). 

The nature of other Federal Government policies 
providing additional farm support has changed over 
the past few decades, moving from price support 
and supply management policies to conservation 
and commodity payments that support farm income, 
reduce trade distortions, and promote environmentally 
sustainable production practices (Dimitri et al. 
2005; ODonoghue et al. 2011). Between 1999 and 
2008, commodity payments such as direct payments, 
loan deficiency payments, and emergency disaster 
assistance represented between 74% and 93% of 
total farm program payments. During 2007, largescale 
family farms and non-family farms received 
roughly 75% of such payments (Hoppe et al. 2010). 
Large-scale family farms and non-family farms also 
received more than 60% of Federal working-lands 
conservation program funding, while conservation 
payments for land retirement went largely to small 
family farms (Hoppe et al. 2010). Rising prices significantly 
increased the value of agricultural production 
during 2007 relative to that of 2002, contributing 
to the recent reductions in farmer reliance on government 
commodity payments as a source of farm and 
farm household income (ODonoghue et al. 2011). 

The aggregate value of agricultural production 
remains fairly evenly split between livestock and 
crop production (Figure 2.5). The source of this 
value is widely distributed geographically across 
the United States (Figure 2.6), although some sectors 
are more regionally specialized than others. 
For example, 
corn and soybean production, which 
accounts for the largest share of crop value, is 
concentrated 
in the Midwest, Great Plains, and Delta 
States. Cattle and calf production, which dominates 

Chapter 2 


Fig. 2.5. Comparison of market value of crops and livestock sold in the 
United States. Source: USDA-ERS data. 


Fig. 2.4. Production under marketing or production contracts for selected crops, 1991-2007. Source: USDA ERS 2002. 


Chapter 2 

Fig. 2.6. Market value of all agricultural products sold in the United States. Source: USDA NASS 2007. 


Fig. 2.7. Distribution of hog and pig production in the United States, 20022007. Source: USDA NASS 2007. 


livestock production values, is distributed across the 
United States, with hog and pig production increasingly 
concentrated in only a few regions (Figure 2.7). 

 U.S. agriculture has become increasingly integrated 
into world markets, with both imports and 
exports of agricultural products growing since 1935 
up to present (Figure 2.8). U.S. exports constitute 
a large fraction of international markets in several 
export markets, with primary agricultural exports 
being soybeans, corn, wheat, and cotton (Table 2.1). 
The amount of each of these exported crops varies 

Chapter 2 


Fig. 2.8. Annual fiscal year (OctSept) U.S. agricultural trade, imports and exports, 1935-2011. 


Table 2.1. Top 25 agricultural export and import commodities for fiscal year2011 fiscal expressed in current dollars. Source: 
Compiled by USDA ERS from U.S. Department of Commerce data. 

Soybeans 20,347,317,208 Coffee Incl Prods 7,335,626,992 
Corn 12,903,604,236 Wine 4,733,790,184 
Wheat Unmilled 11,477,204,419 Cocoa and Prods 4,685,418,643 
Cotton Ex Linters 8,861,356,654 Rubber/allied Gums Crude 4,419,760,212 
Other Feeds & Fodder 5,486,053,783 Malt Beverages 3,526,937,192 
Beef & Veal Fr/Froz 4,387,315,343 Beef and Veal Fr/Froz 2,747,998,291 
Pork Fr/Froz 4,266,308,341 Biscuits and Wafers 2,629,883,334 
Misc Hort Products 4,079,909,279 Misc Hort Products 2,562,187,257 
Chickens Fr/Froz 3,348,722,320 Sugar Cane and Beet 2,534,132,361 
Soybean Meal 3,341,173,322 Other Grains and Preps 2,362,366,330 
Other Grain Prods 3,135,381,498 Other Beverages 2,130,744,738 
Almonds 2,670,069,077 Essential Oils 2,090,178,270 
Rice-Paddy Milled 2,096,410,318 Tomatoes Fresh 2,066,804,158 
Soybean Oil 1,732,970,324 Bananas/Plantains Fr/Froz 1,969,880,327 
Other Veg Oils/Waxes 1,732,735,395 Rapeseed Oil 1,760,653,987 
Related Sugar Prod 1,599,701,798 Other Fruits Prep/Pres 1,666,332,390 
Essential Oils 1,479,155,219 Cattle and Calves 1,450,996,963 
Nonfat Dry Milk 1,451,990,267 Drugs Crude Natural 1,392,815,374 
Seeds Field/Garden 1,354,074,918 Confectionery Prods 1,387,491,573 
Other Dairy Prods 1,335,177,127 Feeds/Fodders EX Oilcake 1,364,875,618 
Other Veg Prep/Pres 1,288,893,350 Cheese 1,061,226,335 
Wine 1,229,833,343 Palm Oil 1,060,916,683 
Beverages Ex Juice 1,228,614,393 Other Dairy Products 1,060,022,264 
Chocolate & Prep 1,152,045,508 Grapes Fresh 988,555,117 
Bovine Hides Whole 1,089,536,141 Berries EX Strawberries 964,566,293 
Exports 2011 Imports 2011 
widely, ranging from 11% for corn to 
78% for cotton, as does the percentage 
of the global market share that 
each of these crops comprises.
U.S. prominence as a corn supplier 
supplying about 50% of global 
exports  makes world markets 
highly sensitive to U.S. supply and 
demand relationships, as well as to 
the weather conditions in the Corn 
Belt (Figure 2.9). 

In contrast, a wide diversity of 
exporters in wheat (Figure 2.10) 
and soybean markets helps protect 
against variability in supply 
occurring due to yield shortages 
or excesses in any one region. The 
share of the world soybean market 
represented by U.S. exports, which 
is currently about 40%, has been 
falling steadily since the mid-1970s, 
in large part due to increasing production and export 
by Brazil and Argentina. The situation is similar 
for wheat, where the United States produces about 
20% of the worlds supply; other major suppliers 
include Argentina, Australia, Canada, Europe, and 
the Former Soviet Union. Of note, the U.S. position 
as a relatively major exporter but minor consumer 
of cotton makes cotton farmers in the United States 
more dependent on the world market, and potentially 
more vulnerable to the trade policies of major 
importers than is the case for the Nations other 
major export commodities. 

U.S. engagement in global livestock markets has 
also increased over the past few decades. U.S. 
pork producers 
have increased exports from 2% of 
production 
in 1990 to 22% of production in 2011, 
while poultry exports have increased from 6% to 18% 

Chapter 2 

Fig. 2.9. Worlds leading corn exporters. Source: USDA ERS 2011. 


Fig. 2.10. Market share of major wheat producers. 


of production over the same period. The United States 
is the largest producer of high-quality, grain-fed beef 
in the world. Though interrupted in 2004 by concerns 
of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), U.S. 
beef exports have been steadily increasing since 
that time (Figure 2.11). In part because imports and 
exports generally represent different grades of beef, 
imports to the United States have also trended higher 
over the past few decades, but since 2010 the United 
States has been a net exporter of beef. Strong global 
demand for dairy products has increased U.S. exports 
in recent years. As a percent of production, U.S. 
dairy exports have reached record levels (17% of 
production in 2011 on a skim-solids basis). However, 
greater participation in world markets has resulted 
in increased exposure across livestock sectors to 
global safety and disease concerns, trade policies, 
and demand shifts driven by changing consumer 
preferences. 

Effects of Technology on U.S. Agriculture 

Agricultural production has steadily increased since 
the 1940s, with the introduction of improved genetics, 
inorganic fertilizers, and crop protection chemicals, 
and cultural management practices. Yields of 
corn, wheat, soybean, and rice for the United States 
have shown increases over the period from 1940 
to present, with corn showing the largest annual 
increase (Figure 2.12a) and wheat (Figure 2.12b) 
showing an increase in yield but at a much slower 
pace than corn. Increases in rice yields (Figure 2.12c) 
have been similar to corn in terms of the annual 
increase. Soybean yields (Figure 2.12d) have shown 
a steady increase since 1940 with annual variations 
throughout the period. All of these crops show a 
common feature with variation in production among 
years; however, there are differences in the years 
that show decreases in yield because of the effect of 
weather differences in the areas in which these crops 
are grown and crop growing season. 

Crop and livestock distribution across the United 
States largely exists in locations where individual 
commodities are best suited for growth due to some 
combination of climate, soil, and/or economic 
return on production. For example, winter wheat 
can be found in areas across the United States in 
which winter temperatures support crop survival, 
yet provide 
adequate exposure to the chilling temperatures 
needed for vernalization that lead to crop 
flowering and grain production. Grain crops, fiber 
crops, vegetable crops, horticultural crops, and fruit 
trees are distributed across the United States in areas 
where production is optimized. Production of each of 
these commodities is reported in the Census of Agriculture 
(USDA-NASS 2007). Also notable, however, 
are the expanded regions of production which have 
occurred due to changes in technology, climate, and 
economics; corn production in North Dakota and 
South Dakota provides one example of such expansion 
from the Midwest. 

Climate Effects on U.S. Agriculture 

Agricultural systems are primarily defined by 
prevailing spatial and temporal distributions of 
climatic and edaphic (soil-related) conditions. As 

Chapter 2 


Fig. 2.11. U.S. Beef Trade, 19802008. The drop in demand associated with fears of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
(BSE) shows clearly in 2004. Source: USDA-ERS. 


such, changes in key climate variables (e.g., seasonal 
temperatures or precipitation patterns) can result in 
changes  perhaps significant  in the mix of commodities 
produced and the systems and technologies 
that farmers employ to produce them. 

Climate change presents a novel challenge to U.S. 
agriculture because of the sensitivity of agricultural 
system response to climatic variability and 
the complexity of interactions between agriculture 
and the global climate system. Interactions within 
the agricultural social-ecological system can result 
in synergistic effects that dampen or amplify the 
system response to climate change and complicate 
development of effective mitigation and adaptation 
options for U.S. agriculture (McLeman and Smit 
2006; Reidsma et al. 2010; Smith and Olesen 2010). 
Developing the knowledge needed to manage agricultural 
production in a changing climate is a critical 
challenge to sustaining U.S. agriculture in the 21st 
century (Robertson and Swinton 2005; Howden et al. 
2007; NRC 2010). 

While the U.S. agricultural system has the ability 
to respond to changes or fluctuations in markets, 
technology, and the environment to a great degree, 
individual agricultural products differ in their ability 
to adapt to changing climate conditions. For example, 
crops have different cardinal temperatures  the 
critical temperature range for ideal lifecycle development. 
These vary by species and between vegetative 
and reproductive growth stages. Basic temperature 
responses by crops range from a base-temperature 
requirement, i.e., the point at which growth begins, 
and a temperature maximum where growth ceases. 
Between these extremes exists an optimum temperature 
where plant growth is fastest. In general, 
optimum temperatures are lower for the reproductive 
stage than the vegetative stage, i.e., plants are less 
able to tolerate high temperatures during the reproductive 
stage. Increasing temperature generally 
accelerates progression of a crop through its lifecycle 
(phenological) phases, up to the species-dependent 
optimum, above which development (node and 
leaf appearance rate) slows. Temperature increases 
projected for the United States under high and low 
scenarios of future GHG emissions are therefore an 
important factor in projecting future U.S. agricultural 
productivity. 

However, increasing air temperature is only one 
factor to consider under current and future climate 

Chapter 2 

Fig. 2.12. U.S crop yields 1940 to 2010; corn(a), wheat (b), rice (c), and soybean (d). Source: USDA-NASS. 


change scenarios; local management practices such 
as irrigation will also influence effects on agriculture. 
For example, amply irrigated plants growing 
under arid conditions create microenvironments 
that are 10C cooler than ambient air temperature 
due to evapotranspiration cooling. Variables such as 
solar and reflected long-wave radiation, wind speed, 
air humidity, and plant stomatal conductance also 
affect to what degree temperature will influence 
crop growth and development. Many climatic factors 
affect agricultural performance, and a complete 
understanding of climate change effects on U.S. agriculture 
requires an understanding of these variables 
and how they interact. 

Like temperature, precipitation has a direct influence 
on agriculture. In many areas of the Nation, 
precipitation is projected to increase, particularly in 
northern regions, but the incidence of drought is also 
expected to increase in some areas, and changes in 
timing and rain/snow mix may increase the management 
challenge of delivering water to crops at the 
right time through irrigation systems and practices. 
The intensity of precipitation events is also expected 
to increase. Excess precipitation, both in the form 
of short bursts or through increased amounts over 
longer episodes, can be just as damaging as too 
little precipitation, leading to increased erosion and 
decreased soil quality. Increased evapotranspiration 
due to warmer temperatures can result in less 
available water  even with increased precipitation 
 especially in soils with limited soil water holding 
capacity. Corn is susceptible to excess water in 
the early growth stages, which can result in reduced 
growth or even plant death, while deficit soil water 
leads to less growth and yield if the stress occurs 
during the grain filling period of growth (Hatfield 
and Prueger 2011). 

In addition to their direct effects on plants, changes 
in temperature and precipitation also affect the 
amount of water in the atmosphere. With increases 
in water vapor, cloud cover is expected to increase, 
leading to a decrease in incoming solar radiation. 
This effect has already been observed in the solar 
radiation record around the world. Stanhill and 
Cohen (2001) observed a 2.7% reduction per decade 
during the past 50 years, with the current solar 
radiation totals reduced by 20 W m-2. Changes in 
solar radiation will directly affect crop water balance 
and evapotranspiration and have less effect on crop 
productivity due to other factors limiting productivity 
(e.g., water and temperature) (Hatfield et al. 2011). 
In a later, U.S.-centered study, Stanhill and Cohen 
(2005) evaluated data from across the United States 
for sunshine duration and global irradiance (solar 
radiation), finding that after 1950 there has been a 
decrease in solar duration, with sites in the Northeast, 
West, and Southwest showing notable decreases. 
They suggested that more detailed solar radiation 
records will be required to quantify temporal changes 
in solar radiation related to cloudiness and aerosols. 
Reduction in solar radiation in agricultural areas in 
the last 60 years as revealed by models (Qian et al. 
2007) is projected to continue (Pan et al. 2004) due 
to increased concentrations of atmospheric GHGs, 
which may partially offset acceleration of plant 
growth. A study on solar radiation by Medvigy and 
Beaulieu (2011) examined the variability in solar 
radiation around the world. They concluded there 
was an increase in solar radiation variability that 
was correlated with increases in precipitation variability 
and deep convective cloud amounts that may 
affect solar energy production and terrestrial ecosystem 
photosynthesis. Any change in solar radiation 
resources under climate change will affect the 
agricultural system. 

Finally, changes in CO2, temperature, precipitation, 
and radiation over the next century will be accompanied 
by other changes in atmospheric chemistry 
that have implications for agriculture. One of the 
most significant of these is expected changes in 
concentrations of ground level ozone. The number 
and complexity of these biophysical interactions 
demonstrates the necessity of systemic analyses of 
potential climate effects on agriculture. All of the 
factors mentioned above will affect U.S. agriculture 
over the coming century, but their ultimate effect will 
also depend on social and economic feedbacks. 

Agriculture: A Complex Social-
Ecological System (SES) 

Agriculture in the United States is a dynamic socialecological 
system (SES) of plant and animal production 
that is dependent on a complex flow of resources 
regulated by the internal processes and interactions 
between ecological and social elements of the 
system that exist and function at multiple scales of 
space, time, and social organization (Figure 2.13). 
Recognition of the interactions within and across 
scales is fundamentally important in understanding 
the behavior 
of the SES at any particular focal 
scale (Gunderson and Holling 2002). For example, 
consider the linkages to management decisions at 
the enterprise focal scale: producer decisionmaking 
is driven by perceptions of risk and other personal 
considerations and preferences, knowledge of the 
production capacity of the enterprise, and multiple 
external drivers (for example, consumer preference, 
market demand, government policies, and climatic 
variability, etc.). Thus the process of plant and 

Chapter 2 


animal production is a dynamic interplay between 
society-driven demand and natural resource supply 
capacity operating within the context of policy structures 
and producer knowledge. 

The U.S. agricultural SES interacts with the global 
climate system through multiple linkages that are 
increasingly responsive to climatic change (Figure 
2.14); these interactions challenge the sustainability 
of U.S. agriculture in the 21st century (NRC 2010). 
Agricultural adaptation to climate change will be 
particularly challenging because of the sensitivity of 
agricultural SES response to climatic variability and 
extremes, the complexity of interactions between the 
agricultural SES and the global climate system, the 
uncertainties associated with how the climate will 
change and the resulting effects at different temporal 
and spatial scales, and the increasing pace of climatic 
change (Howden et al. 2007). Multiple stresses 
such as the limited availability of water, the loss of 
biodiversity, and reduced soil, water, and air quality 
interact to increase the sensitivity of the agricultural 
SES to climatic change (Easterling et al. 2007; NRC 
2010). 

The complexity of the SES response to climatic 
change is a critical challenge to research and development 
efforts seeking to sustain U.S. agriculture 
in the 21st century (Robertson and Swinton 2005; 
Howden et al. 2007; NRC 2010). Understanding 
the vulnerabilities of key components of the U.S. 
agricultural SES and the linkages across spatial and 
temporal scales within it, under multiple uncertainties 
(climate, economic, policy, etc.), is critical to the 
development of effective adaptation strategies. 

New Research for a Novel Challenge 

New research, development, management and governance 
strategies utilizing complex-systems science 
to address the complicated interactions and multidimensional 
nature of agricultural SES response 
to climate change are needed (e.g. Easterling et al. 
2007; Howden et al. 2007; Jackson et al. 2010; NRC 
2010; Hatfield et al. 2011; Lin 2011; Newton et al. 
2011; Tomich et al. 2011). The climate change challenge 
requires an innovative framework to facilitate 
holistic systems thinking across the multiple dimensions 
of the agricultural SES, e.g., farm (Rivington et 

Chapter 2 


Fig. 2.13. The United States agricultural social-ecological system can be viewed as a dynamic system of interacting social 
and ecological components and processes linked to global scale biophysical systems such as climate system and the nitrogen 
cycle and global scale social systems such as international trade and governance (Humphrey 2011). 


al. 2007), region (Reidsma et al. 2010), institutional 
and political structures (Romero and Agrawal 2011), 
trade globalization (Young et al. 2006), and multiple 
actors and the way they are represented (Rounsevell 
et al. 2012). A specific feature of the SES approach 
is that it places the resource manager (or producer or 
consumer) within and as part of the system, rather 
than external to it (Walker et al. 2002; Janssen et al. 
2006). The SES approach incorporates the benefits 
of both focused disciplinary research to tackle 
specific problems, and yet offers the breadth and 
flexibility required to enable integration of multiple 
disciplines (including the social sciences) within the 
overall analysis and development of holistic adaptation 
strategies. Without such a common framework 
to organize findings, isolated knowledge does not 
accumulate and policies may be disjointed or even 
contradictory (Ostrom 2009). 

Also important in the analysis of SES dynamics 
is the rates of change (fast or slow) and the spatial 
scales at which each occurs, the durability of each 
scale (i.e., how resilient a particular component 
such as a farm system is), and the consequences 
for the response of the whole SES (Young et al. 
2006). The SES conceptual framework thus presents 
an approach that can integrate across research 
disciplines and practitioner differences to develop 
appropriate policy and management responses to 
build resilient systems (Walker et al. 2002; Young et 
al. 2006; Nelson et al. 2007; Ostrom 2009). The risk 
of not using an integrated systems approach such as 
the SES is that a greater probability exists of relying 
overly on technological packages that lack site 
specificity, on developing policies with conflicting 
objectives, and failing to recognize the social or ecological 
thresholds that limit local adaptive capacity 
(Nelson et al. 2007) or wider planetary boundaries 
(Rockstrom et al. 2009). 

Past adaptation in the U.S. agricultural SES has 
focused on objectives of production and profitability 
operating within limited ranges of uncertainty (e.g., 
fuel costs, demand, and market prices, etc.). Climate 

Chapter 2 


Fig. 2.14. A schematic framework representing key linkages between the anthropogenic drivers of climate change and 
the global climate system (IPCC 2007, p 26, Figure I.1). An assessment of the interactions between key components of this 
system may inform the development of adaptation options to reduce future climate change impacts on the United States 
agricultural SES. 


change presents a novel adaptation driver, one that 
involves greater uncertainty in future projections of 
risk that is further complicated by tradeoffs between 
mitigation and adaptation. A conceptual framework 
such as the SES approach may aid in the management 
of the uncertainties faced by stakeholders 
operating across multiple dimensions of the U.S. 
agricultural SES under climatic change. For example, 
Dessai et al. (2009) argue that a need exists for 
robust adaptation strategies that are flexible enough 
to account for the range of such uncertainties and 
multiple objectives. The use of probabilistic climate 
projections (based on multi-model ensembles) provides 
information about the likely range of climate 
change effects and the development of risk-based 
assessments (New et al. 2007), while adaptive 
management can provide a buffer against uncertainty 
(Howden et al. 2003; Littell et al. 2011). This implies 
that adaptation planning needs to exist within a conceptual 
structure that facilitates the consideration of 
risks across multiple components of the system and 
responses. 

SES research strategies draw on the knowledge and 
methodological approaches of agroecology, transdisciplinary 
problem-solving, integrated analysis, adaptive 
management, and resilience science in an effort 
to integrate the biophysical, economic, and social 
dimensions of agricultural production. Experience 
from the development of the ecosystem management 
approach (Liu et al. 2011) and the integration of 
social and ecological objectives taking an SES perspective 
may be instructive in guiding strategies for 
U.S. agriculture adaptation. Taking an ecosystemsmanagement 
perspective facilitates incorporation of 
multiple considerations and objectives, and potential 
for attainment of multiple benefits (Munang et al. 
2011). The novel analyses made possible with these 
strategies also support efforts to identify and explore 
the critical thresholds and dynamic cross-scale 
interactions that drive agricultural SES response 
to climatic change. These new strategies are being 
increasingly employed to understand agricultural 
resilience to climate change effects across a variety 
of focal scales, including at the farm level (Hendrickson 
et al. 2008; Moriondo et al. 2010; Reidsma et al. 
2010; van Apeldoorn et al. 2011), in rural communities 
(Atwell et al. 2008; Nelson et al. 2010a; Nelson 
et al. 2010b; Arbuckle 2011), and across regions 
(Allison and Hobbs 2004; Wolfe et al. 2008; Easterling 
2009; Jackson et al. 2011). 

Chapter 2 


Evidence of Changing Climate Across 
the Globe 

The United States and the U.S. agricultural system 
are part of a changing world. There is broad 
scientific agreement that the climate conditions 
affecting agriculture are being changed on a global 
scale by human activities. Burning of fossil fuels, 
deforestation, and a variety of agricultural practices 
and industrial processes are rapidly increasing 
the atmospheric concentrations of CO2 and other 
greenhouse gases (GHGs) (IPCC 2007a, pg. 10). 
These changes in atmospheric composition are 
increasing temperatures, altering the timing and 
distribution of precipitation, and affecting terrestrial 
and marine ecosystems (IPCC AR4 WGI and WGII 
SPMs; IPCC 2007a, b). Scientific evaluation of the 
effects of global climate change done as part of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
Fourth Assessment Report (AR4), new studies in the 
peer-reviewed scientific literature (e.g., Allison et al. 
2009), and assessments by the U.S. Global Change 
Research Program, the U.S. National Research 
Council, and other scientific bodies provide strong 
evidence of ongoing changes in the Earth climate 
system. Among the findings: 

 Global-average surface temperature has increased 
by about 0.74C (0.56-0.92C) over the 20th century 
(IPCC 2007a, pg. 10). 

 Long-term temperature records from ice sheets, 
glaciers, lake sediments, corals, tree rings, and 
historical documents demonstrate that every 
decade in the late 20th century has been warmer 
than the preceding decades (NOAA NCDC 2011; 
Hansen et al. 2012; Jones et al. 2012). 

 The most recent 50 years likely have been the 
warmest worldwide in at least the last 1,300 years 
(IPCC 2007a, pg. 9), and 10 of the 11 warmest 
years on record have occurred since 2001 (NOAA 
NCDC 2011; Hansen et al. 2012). 

 Observations since 1961 show that at depths of 
at least 3,000 meters, the average temperature of 
the global ocean has increased; this deep storage 


Chapter 3 

An Overview of the Changing Climate 

Rainfall Intensities 

Rainfall intensities have also increased in many parts of the world over the last few decades, including 
in the United States. Karl and Knight (1998) found that more than half of the observed increases in total 
annual precipitation for the United States between 1910 and 1996 were due to increases in frequency 
of large events, defined as occurring in the upper 10 percentile of measured daily values. Analyses using 
data from 1910 through 1999 (Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2003) showed that the proportion 
of precipitation coming in the form of heavy (>95th percentile), very heavy (>99th percentile), and 
extreme (>99.9th percentile) daily precipitation events increased by 1.7%, 2.5%, and 3.3% per decade, 
respectively, on average across the United States. The number of large events is on the increase, and the 
increase has been greatest for the most extreme of events. Groisman et al. (2005) looked at measured 
daily rainfall data from over half the land area of the world and found trends of increased probability of 
extreme events for many regions outside of the tropics. The IPPC 4th Assessment Report (Meehl et al., 
2007) also projects general increases in precipitation intensities across much of the Earth. 


of heat together with the higher heat capacity of 
water is causing the ocean surface to warm more 
slowly than the land surface (IPCC 2007a) 

 Global sea level has increased about 12-22 centimeters 
(cm) during the 20th century, but satellite 
records confirm that the rate of sea level rise has 
now almost doubled to about 3.4 millimeters 
(mm) per year (IPCC 2007a; Allison et al. 2009). 

 Precipitation is highly variable and trends are 
more difficult to isolate, but overall precipitation 
and heavy precipitation events have increased 
in most regions; at the same time the occurrence 
of drought has also been on the rise, particularly 
since 1970 (IPCC 2007a; Allison et al. 2009). 

 Mountain glaciers and ice caps, as well as snow 
cover, are receding in most areas of the world. 
Both the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets are 
now losing mass at increasing rates. The extent 
and thickness (volume) of Arctic sea ice is declining, 
and lakes and rivers freeze later in the fall and 
melt earlier in the spring (IPCC 2007a; Allison et 
al. 2009). 

 Winter temperatures have increased more rapidly 
than summer temperatures, and nighttime minimum 
temperatures have warmed more than the 
daytime maxima. Across the United States (and 
elsewhere), the observed number of record high 
temperatures is about three times higher than 
the number of record cold events (IPCC 2007a; 
Meehl et al. 2009). 

Projections of Future Global Climate 

Human influences will continue to alter Earths 
climate throughout the 21st century. Our current 
scientific understanding, supported by a large body 
of theoretical, observational, and modeling results 
(e.g., the IPCC AR4), indicates that continued changes 
in atmospheric composition will result in further 
increases in global average temperature, rising sea 
level, and continued declines in snow cover, land ice, 
and sea ice extent. The IPCC AR4 contains projections 
of the temperature increases that would result from 
many different emissions scenarios (Nakicenovic et 
al. 2000). For this report, we concentrate on low and 
high emissions alternatives defined by the IPCC. The 
characteristics and ways in which these alternative 
scenarios might be achieved are described below: 

 A low emissions scenario for the 21st century 
(IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios 
(SRES) B1) could be achieved by continued 
improvements in technology, low or no growth in 
population, and effective action by individuals, 
corporations, and governments to limit emissions. 
In such a scenario, atmospheric concentration of 
CO2 would increase to about 550 parts per million 
by volume (ppm), which would increase global 
average surface temperature by about 1.1C to 
2.9C in 2100 relative to 1980-1999. 

 A high emissions scenario for the 21st century 
(IPCC SRES A2) would result from a slowing in 
technological improvement, significant population 
growth, and less effective actions taken by individuals, 
corporations, and governments to limit 
emissions. In this scenario, atmospheric concentration 
of CO2 would increase to about 800 parts 
per million (ppm), which would increase global 
average surface temperature by about 2.0C to 
5.4C by 2100 relative to 1980-1999. 

It is important to note that the average surface 
temperature for each of the above scenarios would 
vary by region (see Figure 3.1). Polar areas will 
warm more than lower latitude areas, land more than 
oceans, and continental interiors more than coastal 
areas. 

Climate change in the 21st century will be driven 
predominantly by overall emissions of GHGs and 
aerosols, as well as by the strength of feedbacks in 
the climate system. The lower the emissions during 
the next 100 years, the lower the climate change 
experienced over this time and beyond. It is important 
to note, however, that the climate differences 
between high- and low-emissions scenarios will 
mainly occur in the latter half of the 21st century 
due to the inertia of the climate system. The climate 
changes being experienced today are mainly the 
consequence of past emissions, and todays emissions 
will continue to cause climate change into 
the future. Even if atmospheric concentrations of 
greenhouse gases are stabilized (which would require 
large decreases from current emissions levels), 
land surface temperatures will continue to rise for 
decades, while ocean temperatures and sea level will 
continue to rise for centuries (IPCC 2007a; Solomon 
et al. 2009). 

Changing Climate Across the United 
States: The Last 100 Years 

The United States is a large country with complex 
topography and thus has a considerable variety of 
climate across its different regions. Alaska has high 
annual precipitation and relatively cool average temperatures 
due to very cold winters, while Florida has 

Chapter 3 


Chapter 3 

Fig.3.1. Projected global temperature changes for the 2020s (left side) and 2090s (right side) compared to 1980-1999 for 
low emission (B1) and a high emission (A2) scenarios. The differences between scenarios get wider as time progresses. 
Source: IPCC 2007. 


Climate Models and Climate Research 

Scientists often rely on computer models to better understand Earths climate system because they cannot 
conduct large-scale experiments on the atmosphere itself. Climate studies are largely based on general 
circulation models, which consist of mathematical representations of physical, chemical, and biological 
processes that drive the Earths climate. Climate models, like weather models, use a three-dimensional 
mesh that reaches high into the atmosphere and into the oceans. At regularly spaced intervals, or 
grid points, the models apply laws of physics to compute atmospheric and environmental variables, 
simulating the exchanges among gases, particles, and energy across the atmosphere. To investigate 
possible future changes in climate, different scenarios of future greenhouse gas concentrations are 
used as inputs for the model calculations that produce simulations of climate for the next century and 
beyond. The primary focus in climate simulations is on large regional to global scale interactions of the 
various components of the climate system rather than local scales. This approach enables researchers 
to simulate global climate over years, decades, and millennia. Most current-generation global models 
use grid points that are about 100-200 km apart. Scientists then often use these global model results to 
drive finer scale, regional models with grid spacing ranging from 2-50 km (similar to weather prediction 
models) for small regional and local-scale studies. There are also a number of statistical methods that 
downscale the global models based on available high-resolution observations to estimate finer scale 
change. Most recently, a small number of climate modeling centers are experimenting with very high 
resolution global simulations, however such experiments require very large and expensive amounts of 
supercomputing time and produce very large data sets that are still challenging to analyze. 


high annual precipitation and relatively warm average 
temperatures throughout the year. The Southwest 
experiences warm summers and low average 
precipitation, while the Northeast has warm summers 
and relatively high average annual precipitation. 
U.S. regional climates have been very different in 
the distant past due to large-scale natural climate 
fluctuations  e.g., 18,000 years ago much of New 
England was under a thick layer of ice  but it has 
been relatively stable during the last 1,000 years as 
Europeans explored and migrated to North America, 
and since the founding of the United States and its 
development into a modern nation. However, there 
have been significant inter-annual variations within 
U.S. regions during this period. For instance, year-toyear 
variations in the El Nio-Southern Oscillation, 
fluctuations in the North Pacific and tropical Atlantic, 
as well as other large-scale patterns of natural variability 
have been responsible for extended droughts 
or temperature changes and shifts in the timing and 
distribution of precipitation in some areas, but these 
have been relatively short-lived (i.e., seasonal to 
decadal) anomalies followed by return to more typical 
regional conditions. 

The observational records for the last century clearly 
show that these natural year-to-year fluctuations are 
superimposed on long-term changes in temperature 
and precipitation (NOAA NCDC 2011; Hansen et 
al. 2012; Jones et al. 2012. See also Figure 3.2). 
This trend over the past century is consistent with 
observations of long-term climate change in many 
other areas around the globe, which, as described in 
the previous section, are almost certainly the consequence 
of human-induced changes in the Earths 
atmosphere. 

Temperature 

In most regions of our country, annual mean temperatures 
have increased significantly, though considerable 
variability exists across regions. While Alaska 
has experienced the largest changes, the northern 
Midwest and the Southwest have also warmed 
significantly throughout, with autumn temperatures 
increasing the least. The only large region of the 
United States to experience a linear cooling trend 
over the last century is the Southeast. This region 
warmed during the early part of the 20th century, but 
then cooled markedly during the middle part of the 
century and is now warming again (Figure 3.2, right 
upper pullout). 

Changes in temperature have varied by season as 
well as by region (Figure 3.3). As noted above, 
during the most recent decades, the cooling of the 
Southeast has slowed and then reversed, particularly 
in the cold seasons. Summer has warmed in most 
areas, but not as pronounced as winter. Spring is also 
warmer in most regions, likely related to more rapid 
melting of snow. In much of the United States, the 
century-long linear trend for autumn is still largely 
dominated by the warming in the 1930s and 1940s, 
and therefore the long-term trends remain small, 
with the Southwest a notable exception. This overall 
warming is reflected in a lengthening of the growing 

Chapter 3 


Fig. 3.2. Observed linear 20th century (1901-2006) temperature trends for North America based on stations with complete, consistent, 
and high quality records. The spatial resolution is high in the contiguous U.S., but lower at high latitudes, where interpolation 
was applied to achieve a 0.5-degree (about 50 km) resolution. The two pullouts illustrate that linear trends dont always represent 
the underlying variability well. Data source: University of Delaware, Matsuura and Willmott 2009, Version 2.01, based on augmented 
Global Historical Climatology Network, Version 2, http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/html_pages/download.html. 


season in the Northern Hemisphere by about 4 to 16 
days since 1970 (i.e., 1 to 4 days per decade) (US 
EPA 2010). 

Overall, new record warm temperatures are becoming 
more common than record cold throughout the 
year; across the United States (and elsewhere), the 
observed number of record high temperatures is now 
about three times higher than the number of record 
cold events (IPCC 2007a; Meehl et al. 2009). 

Precipitation 

In contrast to temperature, precipitation is often 
a very small-scale process and thus has greater 
heterogeneity than is the case with temperature 
across the continent. Much of the Northwest, Central, 
and Southern United States now receive more 
precipitation than 100 years ago, while other areas, 
such as parts of the Eastern Seaboard and the Rocky 
Mountains and much of the Southwest, receive less 
(Figure 3.4, lower panel). 

As can be seen in Figure 3.5, century-long trends 
are not continuous through time or across seasons. 
Natural variability has led to decadal fluctuations 
with distinct periods of both drought (e.g., the 1930s 
Dust Bowl, and droughts in western regions) and wet 
intervals. It is important to recognize that analyses 
of average precipitation trends across years and 

Chapter 3 

Overall, new record 
warm temperatures 
are becoming more 
common than record 
cold throughout 
the year. 


Fig. 3.3 Variation of 20th Century U.S. temperatures by season: Linear trends of observed surface temperatures over North 
America (left panels), and time evolution for spatial averages by season for three selected regions (right panels) relative to 
1901-1930. Data source: Univ. of Delaware, Matsuura and Willmott 2009. 

DJF Source: UDel. 
MAM Source: UDel. 
JJA Source: UDel. 
SON Source: UDel. 
Chapter 3 

Fig. 3.4. Same as 3.2, but for precipitation: Observed linear 20th century (1901-2006) precipitation trends for North 
America. Data source: University of Delaware, Matsuura and Willmott 2009. 


Fig. 3.5 Same as 3.3, but for precipitation. Variation of 20th 
Century U.S. precipitation by season relative to 1901-1930.
Data source: Univ. of Delaware, 
Matsuura and Willmott 2009. 


large regions can blur the variability that occurs over 
smaller regions or at specific periods in time (see 
Figures 3.4 and 3.5). 

The intensity of precipitation has also increased in 
most areas, even if some regions get less water overall. 
This trend is consistent with an overall warming, 
since the atmospheres water-vapor carrying capacity 
increases due to higher average temperature. However, 
this does not mean that all of the additional 
moisture is available for agriculture and other biological 
and ecological processes. More intense rain leads 
to faster surface runoff, and higher temperatures 
enhance evapotranspiration losses to the atmosphere, 
both resulting in less available moisture in soils. 

Projections of Future U.S. Climate 
Change 

It is very likely that U.S. climate conditions will 
continue to change throughout the 21st century. 
For the purposes of this document, we have chosen 
to show projections for low and high emissions 
scenarios for the coming decades (centered around 
the 2040s) and the end to the 21st cen tury (centered 
around the 2080s) to illustrate how different levels 
of global GHG emissions could affect future U.S. 
climate conditions. The differences between high and 
low scenarios of future GHG emissions are much 
more noticeable near the end of the century than they 
are in coming decades, similar to the global analysis 
described above. The results shown here (Figures 
3.63.11) are based on multi-model ensemble averages 
produced for the IPCC AR4 that have been 
downscaled to 12-km horizontal resolution and biascorrected 
to provide as much detail as possible about 
the projected regional changes (see Maurer 2007). 

Temperature 

The entire United States is likely to warm substantially 
over the next 40 years, with an increase of 1C 
to 2C over much of the country (Figures 3.6 and 
3.7). This is a substantially greater rate of change 
than that observed over the last century, reflecting 
the accelerated rate of increase in GHG concentrations 
and temperatures observed during the last few 
decades. 

Much of the interior United States is likely to see 
increases of 2C to 3C, while the southeastern 
and western coastal areas will experience about 
1C to 2C degrees of warming. The cooling in the 
Southeast during the middle of the 20th century is 
projected to become warming in throughout the 21st 

Chapter 3 


Fig. 3.6. Projections of U.S. summer surface temperature from a 16-model ensemble for a low emissions scenario (SRESB1, 
top panels) and a high emissions scenario (SRES-A2, bottom panels) relative to 1970-1999. The near-term differences 
between scenarios (left panels showing the 2040s) are much smaller than the long-term differences (right panels showing 
the 2080s). Data source: CMIP3. 


century, continuing the warming seen during the last 
few decades in that region. 

Looking ahead to 2100, a low-emissions scenario is 
likely to produce a summer-time warming of 3C to 
4C in much of the Interior West, with warming of 
2C to 3C almost everywhere else. A high-emissions 
scenario is likely to result in warming of 5C to 
6C in much of the Interior West and Midwest, with 
warming of 3C to 5C in the Southeast and far western 
regions. These changes in mean temperatures 
will very likely be accompanied by significant 
increases in hot nights (Figure 3.8, left panel). This 
widespread warming will lead to a further shift in the 
length of the growing season, reaching the scale of 
a month or two. Occurrence of frost days will also 
change significantly, particularly in the West (Figure 
3.8, right panel). 

Precipitation 

Projected changes in precipitation are more uncertain 
because they are sensitive to local conditions as well 
as shifts in the large-scale atmospheric circulation; 
these uncertainties are probably larger in summer 
than in winter. Figure 3.9 shows projections of 
change in summer precipitation. Over the next 30 to 
40 years, models agree that the Northwest is likely to 
become noticeably drier, with reductions of 15-25% 
in summertime precipitation. Much of the central 

Chapter 3 


Fig. 3.7. Same as Fig. 3.6, but during winter. Source: CMIP3. 


Fig. 3.8. In a high emissions scenario, the U.S. growing season will lengthen by as much as 20-40 days by the end of the 
century (left panel). The number of frost days (days with minimum temperatures below freezing) will be reduced by 20-60 
days in much of the United States. Both panels produced from multi-model ensemble projections based on simulation 
results from CMIP-3. 


South will likely sees decreases of about 5%, while 
some northern central and eastern U.S. regions are 
projected to experience increases of 5-15%. 

Interestingly, the simulations for the low-emissions 
scenario indicate that summer precipitation might 
remain largely stabilized during the second half 
of the 21st century after substantial change during 
the first part of the century. In the higher emissions 
scenario in which emissions continue to increase, 
however, the emerging summer precipitation pattern 
shows a substantially drier Northwest and South, 
while the increasing moisture input along the Eastern 
Seaboard and Northeast is likely to strengthen even 
further. 

Snow availability and timing of snowmelt runoff is 
an important seasonal concern, particularly in western 
regions which are dependent on snow accumulation 
and gradual release of water stored in snowpack 
throughout the spring and summer. Figure 3.10 
shows projected changes in U.S. winter precipitation. 

Most regions of the northern and central U.S. are 
projected to see an increase of 5% to 15% in winter 
precipitation over the next 30-40 years, but areas 
along the southern U.S. border will likely see much 
less, with decreases of 5% to 10% possible; southern 
Texas will likely experience the largest decreases, 
which could be as much as 15-20%. By 2100, the 
low-emission scenario produces smaller further 
changes in climate, particularly in the southern 
regions where drying is expected. At higher latitudes, 
however, the increase in winter precipitation is projected 
to continue quite substantially, particularly in 
the Northwest and Northeast. For the high-emissions 
scenario, the models produce a similar precipitation 
pattern but with substantially larger enhancement 
of the near-term trends. Throughout the far 
South, particularly in Texas and Florida, reductions 
in precipitation may reach 20% to 25%, with strong 
precipitation increases in the North of 20% or more 
(Figure 3.10). 

Although precipitation increases are anticipated for 
large areas of the United States in both the low- and 
high-emission scenarios, it is again important to note 
that this does not necessarily translate into substantially 
more available moisture for agriculture at the 
time when water is needed. Higher temperatures 
lead to both earlier melt and runoff of water stored 
in snow cover, and to increased evapotranspiration 
losses to the atmosphere. In addition, more precipitation 
is projected to fall in shorter, more intense 
storms, leading to more rapid runoff. These factors 
may offset the projected increase in mean precipitation 
amounts in the United States and thus lead to 
less available moisture in soils and less surface water 
for organisms or ecosystems. 

Extreme Conditions 

Average temperature and precipitation are not the 
only factors that affect agricultural systems. Extreme 
climate conditions, such as dry spells, sustained 
droughts, and heat waves can have large effects 

Chapter 3 


SRES-B1 
SRES-A2
MultiModel B1 2040s MultiModel B1 2080s 
MultiModel A2 2040s MultiModel A2 2080s 
precipitation change (%) 
Fig. 3.9. Summer precipitation projections for a low emissions scenario (SRES-B1, upper panels) and a high emissions 
scenario 
(SRES-A2, lower panels) relative to 1970-1999. Data source: CMIP-3. 


on crops and livestock. Changes in the incidence 
of these extreme events could thus have major 
effects on U.S. agricultural productivity and profitability. 
Although models are limited in their ability 
to accurately project the occurrence and timing of 
individual extreme events, observations indicate an 
emerging signal that is consistent with projections 
of an increase in areas experiencing droughts and 
the occurrence of more intense precipitation events 
(Alexander et al. 2006; IPCC 2007a; Zhang et al. 
2007). Figure 3.11 shows how the number of hot 
nights and the duration of very low (agriculturally 
insignificant) rainfall periods are projected to change 
by the end of the 21st century under a high-emissions 
scenario. 

Changes in Tropospheric Ozone 

Current ground-level ozone concentrations are 
considerably higher in the Northern Hemisphere 
than the Southern Hemisphere, with background 
monthly mean ozone concentrations in the Northern 

SRES-B1 
SRES-A2
MultiModel B1 2040s MultiModel B1 2080s 
MultiModel A2 2040s MultiModel A2 2080s 
precipitation change (%) 
Chapter 3 

Fig. 3.10. Same as 3.9 but for winter precipitation projections. Data source: CMIP-3. 


Fig. 3.11. The left panel shows projected changes in duration of dry spells (consecutive number of days with less than 2 mm 
of precipitation). Areas in the West and Southwest can expect increase in dry intervals by more than 12 days. In some parts 
of the Northwest and south-central Texas, this increase could be as much as 2-3 weeks, mostly concentrated in the summer 
season. Some North Central, as well as the East and Southeast regions, are expected to experience little change. The right 
panel shows increases in the number of hot nights (defined as nights with a minimum temperature warmer than 90% of 
the minimums between 1971 and 1990) across the United States projected for the high emissions scenario by the end of 
the 21st century. By 2100 many parts of the United States could experience 30-40 additional hot nights. Data Source:
CMIP-3. 

 


Hemisphere ranging from 35 to 50 parts per billion 
by volume (ppb) (Emmons et al. 2010). In North 
America and Europe, higher ozone concentrations 
occur in the summer with peak daily concentrations 
occurring in the late afternoon. Future ground-level 
ozone concentrations have been explored using a 
variety of possible emissions scenarios (Dentener et 
al. 2006; Stevenson et al. 2006; Dentener et al. 2010; 
Lamarque et al. 2011).1 While multi-model studies 
using the IPCC SRES scenarios showed increases 
in ozone of 2-7 ppb in the Northern Hemisphere 
between 2000 and 2030 (Prather et al. 2003), more 
recent studies have indicated smaller changes or even 
reductions in ozone if current air quality legislation 
is implemented (Dentener et al. 2006). Changes in 
temperature and water vapor will also affect future 
ozone concentrations. Increased temperatures on the 
order of 0.7C and associated changes in water vapor 
are expected to decrease surface ozone in cleaner 
regions, but tend to have the opposite effect in more 
polluted areas (Dentener et al. 2006; Lamarque et al. 
2011). A larger influx of stratospheric ozone under 
climate change conditions and an increasing contribution 
of imported ozone from intercontinental 
transport could also lead to changes in ground level 
ozone in the future (Dentener et al. 2010). 

Conclusions 

The climate of the U.S. has changed during the 
last 100 years, and the rate of climate change has 
increased during the last several decades. A large 
number of observations and simulation experiments 
clearly show that this long-term change is distinct 
from the natural variability of climate that the U.S. 
has always experienced. In most areas of the United 
States, temperatures have increased. Precipitation 
changes have been more variable; while some 
regions have experienced increases, others have seen 
decreases. The growing season has become longer 
all across the U.S., and the number of frost days has 
decreased. 

U.S. climate will continue to change during the 
next century. It is very likely that the amount of 
change will be significantly greater and the rate of 
change more rapid than that experienced during the 
last 100 years. There will be more warm nights and 
longer periods of extreme heat, and the incidence of 
both drought and very heavy precipitation events is 
expected to increase. Continued increases in greenhouse 
gas emissions will increase the amount of 
climate change the United States will experience in 
the next 100 years. Limiting the increase in greenhouse 
gas emissions will reduce the rate and amount 
of climate change during this period. 

There is still some mismatch between the typical 
spatial scales of climate science and agricultural science 
experimentation. The agricultural community 
requires information on local to regional scales (tens 
of kilometers or less) to support studies of climate 
effects and adaptive capacity. Higher resolution 
simulations and projections of change, accompanied 
by improved documentation of probabilities and 
model biases, is a critical overarching research need 
for study of the effects of climate on agriculture. 

Chapter 3 

Ozone 

Ozone is formed photochemically in the troposphere when its precursors (nitrogen oxides and carbon 
monoxide) generated mainly from fossil fuel combustion (e.g., from the energy-generating and 
transportation sectors), methane emissions, large fires and industrial processes, react with volatile 
organic compounds (some from natural vegetation) and oxygen in the presence of sunlight. Ozone and 
its precursors can be transported hundreds of kilometers into rural areas where agricultural activities 
occur and native and managed forests exist. There is evidence that ozone, along with it precursors, is 
increasingly transported from Asia over the Pacific Ocean to North America. Climate change will alter the 
dynamics, temperature, and humidity of the troposphere affecting the occurrence of stagnation episodes 
that lead to high ozone conditions. Efforts to reduce pollution emissions have mostly succeeded in 
lowering peak ozone concentrations, however mean ozone levels in many areas remain high enough 
to impact crops and forests (Booker et al. 2009). Concern exists that future reductions in local ozone 
formation may be offset by rising background levels as global industrialization increases. 


1 The scenarios for ground-level scenarios do not take into 
account the rapid increase in the recent rapid development 
of natural gas using unconventional methods (e.g., hydraulic 
fracturing); such techniques may increase the amount of 
ground-level ozone. 


Time scale is another important issue. The 100-year 
projections that have been the main focus of climate 
change forecasting are of minimal use in agricultural 
planning. The decadal to multi-decadal projections 
that are being undertaken by many climate modeling 
groups are more relevant but still not well suited for 
informing agricultural decisions. Improved seasonal 
to yearly forecasts would be a major step forward in 
providing information useful for production decisions 
and near-term planning. 

The current body of scientific literature on climate 
change effects on agriculture clearly shows that 
availability of water is one of the most important 
elements of adaptive capacity. Yet representation of 
precipitation and other elements of the water cycle 
is one of the most difficult challenges in climate 
and weather modeling. Simulation and prediction 
of precipitation is less robust than simulation and 
prediction of temperature. Improving our ability to 
accurately predict changes in the timing and amount 
of precipitation is also a high priority research need 
for agriculture and climate. 

There is also a profound need for design and 
development of more sophisticated and complete 
modeling systems and simulation experiments 
that include the simultaneous interacting effects 
of multiple stresses on plants and animals, such 
as increased temperatures, increased GHG levels, 
decreased water availability, and increased pest 
populations. Better integration of biological, 
ecological, economic and climate models is needed 
to develop a more complete picture of climate 
change vulnerability, adaptive capacity, and effects. 
More accurate representation of the complexity of 
change will result in the production of more accurate 
and usable projections. 

Chapter 3 

The current body of 
scientific literature on 
climate change effects 
on agriculture clearly 
shows that availability of 
water is one of the most 
important elements of 
adaptive capacity. 


The preceding two chapters have provided 
the backdrop for the next series of chapters, 
describing the U.S. agroecosystem and some 
of the social, physical, and economic components, 
as well as the past, present, and likely future state of 
the global and national climate. The next series of 
chapters will explore many of these aspects in greater 
detail. In this chapter, focus will be on the complex 
and myriad interactions between climate and the U.S. 
agroecosystem, highlighting both the direct and indirect 
effects of current and future climate change. 

Often assessments of the effects of climate change on 
agricultural focus on rising air temperatures, changing 
precipitation patterns, and increasing atmospheric 
CO2 concentrations. All of these are critical factors 
on growth of crops, forage, livestock, and other agricultural 
products. But, as mentioned in the previous 
chapter, another effect of climate change with important 
consequences for U.S. agriculture is the incidence 
of air stagnation, which can lead to episodes 
of higher ozone concentration in agricultural regions. 
Together, these characteristics comprise direct (abiotic 
or physical) effects of climate change. 

Equally important to consider are indirect effects 
of climate change. Included in this mix are effects 
of changing air temperature and precipitation on 
non-crop species found in agroecosystems, such as 
insects, weeds, pathogens, and invasive species. As 
is the case with direct effects, these indirect (biotic or 
biological) effects of climate change can have considerable 
influence on the vitality of U.S. agriculture. 

The complexity of the system and how direct and 
indirect effects of climate change influence both the 
system as a whole and individual species within the 
system makes projecting the net outcome of changes 
to climate change challenging. In the sections 
below, some of the current science describing these 
direct and indirect climate effects on agriculture is 
presented. 

Direct Climate Change Effects 

Air Temperature 

Average air temperatures in the contiguous United 
States are expected to increase during the next 30 
years (Karl et al. 2009). Such temperature increase 
will almost inevitably affect agricultural products, as 
all plants have minimum, maximum, and optimum 
temperatures that define their response to temperature. 
The minimum and maximum temperatures are 
the boundaries for growth; between these extremes 
is an optimum temperature that allows greatest 
growth. Beyond a certain point, higher air temperatures 
adversely affect plant growth, pollination, and 
reproductive processes (Klein et al. 2007; Sacks 
and Kucharik 2011). However, as air temperatures 
rise beyond the optimum, instead of falling at a rate 
commensurate with the temperature increase, crop 
yield losses accelerate. For example, an analysis 
by Schlenker and Roberts (2009) indicates that 
yield growth for corn, soybean, and cotton gradually 
increases with temperatures up to 29oC to 32oC 
and then decreases sharply as temperature increases 
beyond this point. 

Temperature minimum, maximum, and optimum 
have been summarized by Hatfield et al. (2011) for a 
number of different species, providing thresholds to 
use when assessing the potential effects of increasing 
temperature on crop growth. This information 
was used in crop simulation models to show that 
continued increases of temperature will lead to yield 
declines between 2.5% and 10% across a number 
of agronomic species throughout the 21st century. 
Other evaluations of temperature on crop yield 
have had varying outcomes: Lobell et al. (2011) 
showed estimates of yield decline between 3.8% and 
5%; Schlenker and Roberts (2009) used a statistical 
approach to produce estimates of wheat, corn, 
and cotton yield declines of 36% to 40% under a 
low-emissions scenario, and declines between 63% 
to 70% for a higher emissions scenario. Note that 
these simulation exercises did not incorporate effects 


Chapter 4 

Climate Change Science and Agriculture 

The complexity of the 
system and how direct 
and indirect effects 
of climate change 
influence both the 
system as a whole 
and individual species 
within the system 
makes projecting 
the net outcome of 
changes to climate 
change challenging. 


of rising atmospheric CO2 on crop growth, yield 
reductions due to pests, crop genetic variability, or 
management innovations such as new fertilizers, 
rotations, tillage, or irrigation. Experiments are 
currently underway to update simulation models to 
account for interacting effects of temperature, CO2, 
and moisture on crop growth, genetic variability, and 
production effects. 

Research tends to focus on the effects of average 
air temperature changes on crops; however, minimum 
air temperature changes may be of greater 
importance (Knowles et al. 2006) because minimum 
temperatures are more likely to be increased 
by climate change over broad geographic scales 
(Knowles et al. 2006). Minimum air temperatures 
affect nighttime plant respiration rate and can reduce 
biomass accumulation and crop yield (Hatfield et al. 
2011). Even as climate warms and minimum average 
temperatures increase, years with low maximum 
temperatures may more frequently be closer to 
achieving the temperature optimum, which will result 
in higher yields than is the case today during years 
when average temperatures are below the optimum. 
Welch et al. (2010) found this to be the case for a 
historical analysis of rice in Asia  higher minimum 
temperatures reduced yields, while higher maximum 
temperature raised yields; notably, the maximum 
temperature seldom reached the critical optimum 
temperature for rice. As future temperatures increase, 
the authors found that the maximum temperatures 
could decrease yields if they rise substantially above 
the critical zone. 

Maximum temperatures are affected by local conditions, 
especially soil water content and evaporative 
heat loss as soil water evaporates (Alfaro et al. 2006). 
Hence, in areas where changing climate is expected 
to cause increased rainfall or where irrigation is 
predominant, large increases of maximum temperatures 
are less likely to occur than will be the case in 
regions where drought is prevalent. 

Increasing air temperature can enable earlier planting 
during the spring if suitable moisture and soil 
temperature conditions exist, resulting in a longer 
growing season. A longer growing season creates 
more time to accumulate photosynthetic products 
for greater biomass and harvestable yields as long 
as the temperatures do not exceed optimum values. 
However, increasing temperatures will also increase 
crop water demand and larger plants will use more 
soil water as part of the growth process (Betts et al. 
2007). The positive effects of temperature could be 
offset by increased variation of precipitation and soil 
water availability to the crop. At the same time, a 
longer growing season can affect water availability 
(Betts et al. 2007), as well as weed and insect interactions 
with crops. 

In addition to effects on crops, increasing air temperatures 
will affect livestock production through 
increases in animal stress, with such stress further 
amplified when higher air temperature is coupled 
with higher relative humidity. Animal stress, as 
evidenced by reduced pregnancy rates, longer time 
needed for the animals to reach market weight, and 
reduced milk production, can result in livestock 
production declines. Of note, minimum temperature 
is the environmental variable having the closest 
relationship with beef cattle pregnancy rate, with 
12.6C to 14.9C being the optimum temperature for 
supporting beef pregnancy. 

Water 

Precipitation has a direct influence on agriculture 
and is projected to increase for some areas of the 
United States and decrease for others. Changes of 
the timing, intensity, and amount of rain/snow mix 
for a location are expected to increase the management 
challenge of delivering water to crops at the 
right time through irrigation systems and practices. 
Excess precipitation can be as damaging as receipt of 
too little precipitation due to the increase in flooding 
events, greater erosion, and decreased soil quality. 
Increases in evapotranspiration can result in less 
available water even in cases when precipitation 
amounts increase, particularly in soils with limited 
soil water holding capacity. For example, excess 
water during corns early growth stages may cause a 
reduction in growth or even death, while soil water 
deficit may lead to less growth and lower yields if the 
stress occurs during the grain filling period of growth 
(Hatfield and Prueger 2011). 

Water requirements for agriculture are expected to 
increase due to rising temperatures. An example 
of the regional effect of changing temperature, the 
U.S. West will experience declining snow accumulation 
and early, faster snow-melt rates due to earlier 
spring-time warming and higher average winter-time 
air temperatures; this region depends on snowpack 
runoff both for early-season crop growth and irrigation 
needs later in the growing season (Knowles et al. 
2006). 

Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

Carbon dioxide concentrations of the well-mixed 
atmosphere, as sampled at the summit of Mauna Loa, 
Hawaii, have increased rapidly since measurements 
began in 1958. Because enhanced atmospheric CO2 
concentrations stimulate photosynthesis and plant 

Chapter 4 


growth, much work has been focused on determining 
the responses of crops and weeds to elevated CO2, 
often in single-variable experiments. To fully 
appreciate the implications of CO2 for weeds, it is 
necessary to understand the nature of individual 
species versus crop population responses. Although 
higher CO2 levels typically increase growth, the 
response varies by species. Part of this variability is 
related to photosynthetic biochemistry. For example, 
plants with the C3 photosynthetic pathway (about 
95% of all plant species) are likely to respond more 
strongly than plants possessing the C4 photosynthetic 
pathway (for which photosynthetic rates are saturated 
at current, ambient CO2). 

Most experiments have used one or two elevated 
CO2 concentrations, most often near 550 or 700 
mmol mol-1 (i.e., 550 to 700 ppm2), rather than 
concentrations 
based on particular future target 
dates and emission scenarios; the ambient control 
concentration has increased gradually over the years 
of this research, which complicates comparisons of 
responses. Hurdles involved in moving similar studies 
forward is that debate exists about the most realistic 
experimental techniques to expose crops to simulated 
future CO2 concentrations (Holtum and Winter 2003; 
Long et al. 2005; Long et al. 2006; Tubiello et al. 
2007; Ziska and Bunce 2007). 

Yields of wheat, rice, and soybeans under field 
conditions increased approximately 12% to 15% 
under 550 ppm compared with 370 ppm CO2 
concentrations, with the percentage increases about 
1.6 times those for elevated CO2 concentrations of 
approximately 700 ppm. As compared with most 
other annual crop species, cotton had an exceptional 
43% yield increase under increased CO2 concentrations, 
but it should be noted that some varieties of 
rice and soybean also had yield increases as large as 
cotton. Corn had negligible yield increases. Within 
C3 species, we might expect differences in CO2 
responsiveness between sexual and vegetative commodities 
(e.g., seed crops versus pasture species), 
and between root and shoot crops. However, given 
the variation in response among varieties within species, 
these expected differences in response have not 
been substantiated. Also, response differences may 
exist between annual and perennial species because 
the stimulation of growth by perennial species grown 
with little competition may be cumulative over years. 

Elevated atmospheric CO2 can modify responses 
of crops to environmental stresses. Some modifications 
tend to reduce effects of stress, such as elevated 
CO2 causing partial stomatal closure and reducing 
penetration of ozone into leaves, which in turn 
lowers yield losses due to ozone (Fiscus et al. 1997; 
Booker and Fiscus 2005). Partial stomatal closure at 
elevated CO2 also reduces crop water loss (Jarvis and 
McNaughton 1986; Wilson et al. 1999; Bunce 2004). 
However, elevated CO2 increases crop tissue temperatures, 
which may exacerbate damage to reproductive 
processes caused by high air temperatures. 

Rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations over the 
last 150 years have likely increased productivity of 
pastures (Polley et al. 2003; Izaurralde et al. 2011). 
Based on simulation studies, it is expected that the 
productivity of Great Plains native grasslands will 
continue to increase over the next 30 years as air 
temperature and atmospheric CO2 concentrations 

Chapter 4 

The Difference Between C3 and 
C4 Plants 

Most plant life on Earth can be broken into two 
categories based on the way they assimilate 
carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere 
into different physiological components. 
More than 95% of the worlds plant species 
fall into the C3 category. As CO2 is taken up 
from the air by C3 plants the first component 
formed is a three-carbon compound as the 
first stable product of carbon fixation, while C4 
plants make a four-carbon compound during 
the initial stages of photosynthesis. The most 
recognizable C4 plants, include sugarcane 
and corn. One of the most important 
differences between C3 and C4 species for 
rising CO2 levels is that C3 species continue 
to increase photosynthesis with rising CO2, 
while C4 species do not. Another important 
difference between C3 and C4 plants is evident 
in stomatal conductance and water use by 
plants. There is a decrease in the stomatal 
conductance of the leaves (Wand et al 1999; 
Ainsworth et al 2002) as the atmospheric 
concentration of CO2 increases. The result of 
this decrease in conductance is a reduction in 
the rate of water use and an increase in water 
use efficiency (amount of biomass produced 
per unit of water transpired). 


2 One mmol mol-1 is equivalent to one ppm by volume; ppm 
will be the units used throughout the rest of this report. 


increase (Parton et al. 2007; Izaurralde et al. 2011). 
Rangeland species encompass a wide variety of 
types of plants and include both C3 and C4 species; 
elevated CO2 can increase the proportion of C3 relative 
to C4 species (Owensby et al. 1999). Rangeland 
species responses to increased temperature and 
CO2 are similar to those of the major crops, though 
interactions among species are more important as 
rangelands consist of a mixture of species. 

As is the case for rangelands, the mixed nature of 
pasture crops has important implications for the 
response to water and nutrients under elevated 
temperatures and CO2. In Texas, average pastureland 
biomass increased with CO2 concentration, with 
increases ranging from 120 to 160 g m-2 per 100 
ppm increase in CO2 (Polley et al. 2003). Rangeland 
species will grow faster with higher temperatures and 
experience a longer growing season. 

Beneficial to growth of woody plants, encroachment 
of such species into pastures may reduce the 
available nutrients for livestock and will, as a result, 
require management changes to address. An analysis 
of cattle fecal chemistry over the past 14 years 
suggests that changes in pasture makeup and effects 
of increased temperature and decreased rainfall have 
resulted in a general decline in forage quality (Craine 
et al. 2010). This includes a decrease in dietary crude 
protein and digestible organic matter. Consequently, 
it seems likely that the livestock industry will have 
to provide increased supplemental feeds to pastureraised 
cattle in the future to prevent decreased cattle 
growth (Craine et al. 2010). 

In addition to production quantity, the quality of 
agricultural products may be altered by elevated 
CO2. For example, some non-nitrogen-fixing plants 
grown at elevated CO2 have reduced nitrogen (N) 
content (Ainsworth and Long 2005). Nitrogen is a 
critical agricultural crop nutrient. The mechanism for 
this is unclear. One implication may be that changes 
of N application-practices may be useful in dealing 
with climate change effects, both for the economic 
gains by producers, and to reduce the environmental 
effects of elevated residual soil N. For instance, non 
N-fixing cereal and forage crops grown at elevated 
CO2 often have lower protein contents (Erbs et al. 
2010), which will affect human and animal nutrition, 
and could also affect the behavior of pests. More 
subtle product quality responses, especially to temperature 
and water stress, may also be very important 
economically. 

Tropospheric Ozone 

Recently, a number of innovative studies have 
advanced understanding of plant responses to ozone, 
refining researchers knowledge of ozone-agriculture 
interactions under changing climate conditions. This 
enhanced understanding of ozones effects on U.S. 
agriculture is increasingly important because ozone 
and its precursors are transported hundreds of miles 
into rural areas affecting native and managed forests, 
including culturally important Class I Wilderness 
Areas, as well as farm, pasture, and other regions of 
agricultural activity (Mickley et al. 2004; Dentener et 
al. 2006). 

Ozone, after uptake through the leafs stomata, 
interacts with plants cellular processes, inhibiting 
photosynthesis, growth, and yield. Gene expression 
and proteomic studies show that detrimental ozone 
effects are likely caused by a combination of chemical 
toxicity and plant-mediated responses that either 
amplify or inhibit injury (Cho et al. 2011). Already, 
studies indicate that current ambient ozone levels 
are suppressing yields of crops such as alfalfa, bean, 
clover, cotton, peanut, potato, rice, soybean, sugar 
cane, and wheat in many regions of the United States 
and worldwide (Booker et al. 2009; Grantz and Vu 
2009). In addition, changes in leaf chemistry due to 
elevated ozone exposure in common grassland species 
have reduced nutritional quality of the land used 
to support grazing animals. This loss of food quality 
may be more significant than biomass losses in the 
assessment of ozones effect on forages (Muntifering 
et al. 2006). Additionally, ozone may offset potential 
elevated CO2 aerial fertilization effects in some 
plants. 

Elevated CO2 and ozone pollution interact to affect 
crop yields, suggesting that projected benefits of 
rising CO2 in the atmosphere may be overly optimistic 
because they are based on models that do not 
include many important confounding factors in the 
environment. However, in some cases, increases of 
atmospheric CO2 may lessen ozone injury (Ainsworth 
and Long 2005; Fiscus et al. 2005), although the 
interaction becomes less effective as ozone concentrations 
increase. 

At the agroecosystem level, ozone effects on soil 
carbon (C) and nitrogen dynamics have not been well 
characterized. Changes in below-ground crop processes 
are hypothesized to result mainly from ozone 
effects on plant C allocation and biomass production. 
Both are generally reduced by ozone, especially in 
plant roots (Andersen 2003; Grantz et al. 2006); for 
example, decreased N2 fixation with elevated ozone 
has been observed (Tu et al. 2009). Expression of 

Chapter 4 

In addition to 
production quantity, the 
quality of agricultural 
products may be altered 
by elevated CO2. 


genes and proteins involved in photosynthesis is 
suppressed, while carbohydrate catabolism, oxidative 
signaling, antioxidant, and defense pathways are 
stimulated by ozone (Ahsan et al. 2010; Booker et 
al. 2011; Cho et al. 2011). The responses are hypothesized 
to be due in part to a need for energy and a 
reduction in the plants power to detoxify and repair 
damage caused by oxidative molecules (Ahsan et al. 
2010). 

In a 6-year, no-till, soybean-wheat study conducted 
in open-top field chambers, there was no effect of 
ozone on soil microbial activity, biomass, community 
composition, or nitrogen mineralization, in contrast 
to elevated CO2, which increased these processes 
(Cheng et al. 2011). Plant residue input in the opentop 
chamber experiment was less in the added ozone 
treatment, but seemed to have no effect on soil 
nitrogen (Cheng et al. 2011). A Soybean Free Air 
Concentration Enrichment (SoyFACE) study showed 
that with 20% higher ozone, bulk soil nitrogen and 
carbon concentrations were 12% and 15% higher, 
respectively, than in soil from plots exposed to ambient 
air (Pujol Pereira et al. 2011). It was suggested 
that decomposition processes may have been slower 
under elevated ozone due to the lower amount of 
plant material input. Soil NH4
+ concentration was 
decreased by ozone, possibly related to decreased 
residue input and lower symbiotic N2 fixation. 
Denitrifying bacteria increased with soil organic 
carbon at the SoyFACE site (Pujol Pereira et al. 
2011). Decreased N2 fixation with elevated ozone has 
also been observed in peanut (Tu et al. 2009). There 
is no evidence that soil carbon and nitrogen dynamics 
in highly managed agroecosystems are significantly 
influenced by ambient ozone in the United States, 
although it is possible that substantial reductions in 
biomass production due to higher future ozone levels 
could influence soil nutrient cycling processes. It 
should be noted, however, that the potential influence 
of high ambient ozone levels on soil nutrient cycling 
has not been evaluated in the agriculturally productive 
regions of southern California, eastern China, or 
northern India, for example, where ozone effects on 
crops are evident (Booker et al. 2009). 

Indirect Climate Change Effects 

As is the case with crops and livestock, climate 
change affects weeds, pests, and pathogens. Changes 
in temperature and precipitation patterns, coupled 
with increasing atmospheric CO2, create new conditions 
that change weed-infestation intensity, insect 
population levels, the incidence of pathogens, and the 
geographic distribution of many of these pests. Such 
changes on non-crop species found in agroecosystems 
are indirect effects of climate change. For agriculture, 
such effects can alter production yields and quality, 
and may necessitate changes to management practices. 
These indirect effects may also increase farming 
costs, as additional inputs may be required to manage 
the influence of weeds, invasive species, insects, and 
other pests. Weeds cause the highest crop losses globally 
(34%), with insect pests and pathogens showing 
losses of 18% and 16%, respectively (Oerke 2006). 
In the following sections, some of the indirect effects 
of climate change on weeds, pests, and pathogens and 
their respective effects on U.S. agriculture will be 
sketched out. 

Weeds and Invasive Plant Species 

Agronomic Weeds 

Cropland agriculture, in its simplest arrangement, 
can be characterized as a managed plant community 
that is composed of a desired plant species (the 
crop) and a set of undesired plant species (weeds). 
Agronomic weeds reduce food production through 
competition for light, nutrients, and water, and by 
reducing production quality, increasing harvest interference, 
and acting as hosts for other pest vectors. 
By altering the environment (e.g., temperature) or 
increasing a resource (e.g., CO2), we change not only 
the growth of an individual, but also the interactions 
among species, and the growth patterns of the entire 
plant community. 

Temperature and Precipitation Effects on Agronomic 
Weeds 

Weed scientists have long recognized that temperature 
controls weed species success (Woodward 
and Williams 1987). Thus, warming will affect the 
dissemination of weeds with subsequent effects on 
their growth, reproduction, and distribution. Many 
of the most troublesome weeds in agriculture  both 
warm-season (C3) and cool-season (C4) species  are 
confined to tropical or subtropical areas (Holm et al. 
1997); the lower temperature extremes that occur 
at higher latitudes are inhospitable to many weeds. 
High-latitude temperature limits of tropical species 
are set by accumulated degree days (Patterson et al. 
1999), while low-latitude limits are determined, in 
part, by competitive ability to survive at lower temperatures 
(Woodward 1988). However, because many 
weeds associated with warm season crops originate 
in tropical or warm temperature areas, northward 
expansion of these weeds may accelerate with warming 
(Patterson 1993; Rahman and Wardle 1990). 

For maize and soybean crops within the United 
States, there is a clear latitudinal distinction between 
the Great Lakes (Michigan, Minnesota, Wisconsin) 
and Gulf States (Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi) 

Chapter 4 


Agronomic weeds reduce 
food production through 
competition for light, 
nutrients, and water, and 
by reducing production 
quality, increasing 
harvest interference, and 
acting as hosts for other 
pest vectors. 


with respect to weed limitations (Bunce and Ziska 
2000). The greater soybean and corn losses in the 
southern Gulf States are associated with a number of 
very aggressive weed species found in tropical or subtropical 
areas (e.g., prickly sida and Johnson grass). 
Warmer temperatures, in particular an increase in the 
number of frost-free days, may allow a northward 
expansion of these aggressive weeds into other areas 
of the Midwest, with subsequent effects on maize and 
soybean production. An analysis of such changes, 
using a damage niche hypothesis, and a business 
as usual climate scenario (IPCC 2007) showed 
significant changes in the range of two weed species 
affecting corn in the northern and southern United 
States (velvetleaf and Johnson grass, C3 and C4 
weeds, respectively) (Mcdonald et al. 2009). Based 
on these initial evaluations, velvetleaf, a cold-tolerant 
annual weed, is likely to become less problematic in 
the Corn Belt; whereas Johnson grass, a warm-season 
perennial, may become more common, advancing 
northward by 200 to 600 km by midcentury. 

Given their similar life histories and growth rates, 
crops and weeds are likely to have similar responses 
to drought; consequently, the overall effect of weeds 
may be reduced because of decreased growth of 
both crops and weeds in response to water availability 
(Patterson 1995). However, effects of drought 
are likely to vary widely among crops and weeds. 
In corn, for example, drought has been found to 
both decrease interference from weed communities 
dominated by foxtail (Setaria) species (McGiffen et 
al. 1997) and increase competitive ability of Johnson 
grass (Leguizamon 2011). 

Effects of Carbon Dioxide on Agronomic Weeds 

There are only a handful of field studies that have 
quantified changes in crop yields with weedy competition 
as a function of rising atmospheric CO2 (Ziska 
2000; 2003a; 2010). These outcomes were consistent 
with the known kinetics of the photosynthetic pathway; 
i.e., plants with the C4 photosynthetic pathway 
performed poorly relative to plants with the C3 photosynthetic 
pathway as atmospheric CO2 increased. 
For example, soybean yield losses from pigweed, a 
C4 weed, were reduced from 45% to 30% with rising 
CO2 (Ziska 2003a). Conversely, for dwarf sorghum 
(C4 crop) and velvetleaf (a C3 weed), yields further 
reduced as CO2 increased. 

However, the interaction of rising CO2 on cropweed 
competition must also consider weed-crop 
associations where both plant species have the same 
photosynthetic pathway, a situation that often occurs 
since agronomic practices tend to select, over time, 
for weeds with similar morphological and phenological 
characteristics to the crop. An assessment of these 
weed crop interactions (Table 4.1) demonstrates that 
agronomic weeds consistently respond more than 
crops to elevated CO2. 

Chapter 4 


Table 4.1. Summary of studies examining whether weed or crops grown in competition were favored as a function of elevated 
concentrations of CO2. Favored indicates whether elevated [CO2] produced significantly more crop or weed biomass. 

Crop Weed 
Increasing [CO2] 
Environment Reference 
Favors 
A. C4 Crops / C4 Weeds 
Sorghum Amaranthus retroflexus Weed Field Ziska (2003) 
B. C4 Crops / C3 Weeds 
Sorghum Xanthium strumarium Weed Glasshouse Ziska (2001) 
Sorghum Albutilon theophrasti Weed Field Ziska (2003) 
C. C3 Crops / C3 Weeds 
Soybean Cirsium arvense Weed Field Ziska (2010) 
Soybean Chenopodium album Weed Field Ziska (2000) 
Lucerne Taraxacum officinale Weed Field Bunce (1995) 
Pasture Taraxacum and Plantago Weed Field Potvin & Vasseur (1997) 
Pasture Plantago lanceolate Weed Chamber Newton et al. (1996) 
D. C3 Crops / C4 Weeds 
Fescue Sorghum halapense Crop Glasshouse Carter & Peterson (1983) 
Soybean Sorghum halapense Crop Chamber Patterson et al. 1984 
Rice Echinochloa glabrescens Crop Glasshouse Alberto et al. (1996) 
Soybean A. retroflexus Crop Field Ziska (2000) 
Interactive Effects of Global Changes on
Agronomic Weeds 

To date, only one study has evaluated the interaction 
between temperature, CO2, and crop/weed competition 
(Alberto et al. 1996). This study found increased 
CO2 to favor rice, a C3 crop, over a C4 weed at 
27/21C; however, concurrent increases in CO2 and 
temperature favored the weed, due to increased seed 
yield loss for rice relative to the weed (Alberto et al. 
1996). Hypothetically, there are a number of additional 
potential interactive effects related to temperature, 
CO2, and weed/crop competition. For example, 
growth of tropical weeds is strongly stimulated by 
small air temperature changes (Flint et al. 1984; 
Flint and Patterson 1983), but it is unknown if a 
greater synergy with rising CO2 would be anticipated 
for these weeds relative to tropical crops. Still, the 
Alberto study emphasizes that effects of climate 
change on simple competitive outcomes will be difficult 
to predict based simply on a C3 crop/C4 weed 
model. 

Few studies have examined interactions between 
drought, rising CO2, and weed/crop competition. 
Although competition was not determined directly, 
the proportion of weed biomass increased with CO2 
to a similar extent in wet and dry treatments in a 
pasture mixture (Newton et al. 1996). In a study of 
tomato (C3 crop) and redroot pigweed (C4 weed), 
well-watered conditions resulted in reduced competition 
from the weedy species; however, if drought and 
high CO2 occurred concurrently, redroot pigweed 
was a better competitor (Valerio et al. 2011). Overall, 
if C4 weeds utilize less water with increasing CO2 
than do C3 crops, C4 weeds could potentially outcompete 
C3 crops in high CO2/drought conditions 
(Knapp et al. 1993). 

Similarly, little information is available regarding 
weed/crop competition, CO2, and nutrient availability. 
Under extreme nutrient limitations, stimulation 
of biomass with additional CO2 may be minimal; 
however, under moderate nutrient limitations more 
relevant to agricultural situations, the increase in 
biomass may be reduced, but still occur (e.g., Rogers 
et al. 1993; Seneweera et al. 1994). In the only 
published study to examine competition between a 
C3 crop (rice) and a C4 weed (barnyard grass) (Zhu 
et al. 2008), the proportion of rice biomass increased 
relative to barnyard grass with a 200 ppm increase in 
atmospheric CO2, but only if nitrogen was adequate. 
If N was low, elevated CO2 reduced the competitive 
abilities of rice relative to the C4 weed, presumably 
by reducing carbon sinks (e.g., tiller formation) in 
rice. These data indicate that in rice cropping systems 
with limited N, rising CO2 could still exacerbate 
competitive losses, even from C4 weeds. 

Invasive weeds 

Invasive weeds compete with desired plants in 
rangelands, pastures and other perennial agricultural 
systems in the United States, reducing both food production 
and biological diversity (DiTomaso 2000). 
A key difference between agronomic weeds and 
invasive plants, with respect to global change, is that 
global changes that influence plant resources (water, 
N, light, C) influence invasive weeds particularly 
strongly (Bradley et al. 2010a). 

Temperature and Precipitation Effects on Invasive 
Weeds 

Both warming and precipitation change can alter 
plant resources and invasion. Experimental warming 
has been found to favor invasion in relatively wet 
European grassland (Verlinden and Nijs 2010), but 
to have little effect on, or to inhibit invasive species 
in drier California and New Zealand grasslands, 
perhaps because it increases evapotranspiration and 
therefore water limitation (Williams et al. 2007; 
Verlinden and Nijs 2010; Dukes et al. 2011). As with 
agronomic weeds, warming may be most likely to 
favor C4 invaders competing with C3 species (Bijoor 
et al. 2008) and inhibit C3 invaders competing with 
C4 species (Williams et al. 2007). The few experiments 
examining how changing precipitation might 
influence invasion suggest that effects depend on 
seasonality. Increases in winter precipitation favored 
invasive species in mixed-grass prairie (Figure 4.1, 
Blumenthal et al. 2008), while increases in spring 

Chapter 4 


Fig. 4.1. Increased snow, nitrogen, and particularly the combination 
of the two, increase Dalmatian toadflax (Linaria 
dalmatica) invasion in mixed-grass rangeland. (USDA ARS 
Photo courtesy of Stephen Asmus.) 


precipitation favored invasive species in California 
and Utah grasslands (Miller et al. 2006; Thomsen 
and DAntonio 2007). Across studies and ecosystems, 
invasive species tend to use more water than 
natives (Cavaleri and Sack 2010), suggesting that 
invasive species may often be favored by increased 
water availability during their growing season (Bradley 
2009). Therefore, the large sections of the United 
States that are expected to receive higher precipitation 
may need to engage more actively in invasive 
weed management. 

In addition to altering the success of invasive species 
within plant communities, changes in climate are 
also likely to alter the distributions of those species 
(McDonald et al. 2009; Watt et al. 2009; Ibanez 
et al. 2009; Bradley 2009; Bradley et al. 2010b; 
Jarnevich and Reynolds 2011.) Biogeographical 
modeling, which uses current spatial distribution to 
identify suitable habitat under future climate conditions, 
suggests that rising temperatures and altered 
precipitation may not consistently increase invasive 
species ranges (Bradley et al. 2010a). For some 
species, projected changes in climate primarily cause 
an expansion of invasion risk (e.g., Jarnevich and 
Stohlgren 2009; McDonald et al. 2009; Bradley et al. 
2010b), particularly near the cooler margins of their 
range (poleward and upward in elevation). For other 
species, climate change may reduce invasion risk in 
portions of the invaded range (e.g., Parker-Allie et 
al. 2007; Beaumont et al. 2009; Bradley 2009). For 
example, a model of spotted knapweed risk suggests 
that the species potential range will be substantially 
reduced with climate change, while cheatgrass 
potential range shifts, expanding into currently wetter 
areas and contracting from currently drier areas 
(Figure 4.2). 

Extreme climatic events such as drought, flooding, 
and strong storms, which are predicted to become 
more frequent with climate change, can also influence 
weed invasion (Jimenez et al. 2011; Diez et 
al. 2012). While decreasing precipitation might be 
expected to inhibit invasion, severe or extended 
droughts can act as disturbances, decreasing biotic 
resistance from native species, and providing 
opportunities for invasive species once precipitation 
returns. For example, in Arizona rangeland, severe 
drought in 2004 and 2005 led to the death of many 
native shrubs and grasses, followed by rapid invasion 
and dominance by Lehmann lovegrass (Eragrostis 
lehmanniana) (Scott et al. 2010). Similarly, hurricanes 
in Florida and Louisiana have damaged forests 
and increased cover of invasive vines (Horvitz et al. 
1998; Brown et al. 2011). 

Effects of Carbon Dioxide on Invasive Weeds 

Many plants grow faster with elevated CO2. Inherently 
fast-growing plants, including many invasive 
plants, can respond particularly strongly (Poorter and 
Navas 2003; Ziska 2003b; Ziska et al. 2005; Song et 
al. 2009). In controlled-environment studies, these 
differences have not translated into consistently 
stronger CO2 responses in invasive than non-invasive 
plants (Dukes 2000). However, in field studies that 
incorporate competition with native plants, elevated 

Chapter 4 


Fig. 4.2. Biogeographical models project range shifts in invasive plant distribution, creating both areas of increased and 
decreased risk. Colors show future climatically suitable regions for invasive plant species according to climate projections 
for the year 2100 from 10 Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation Models (AOGCMs) under the IPCC A1B future climate 
scenario. Warmer colors represent greater overlap of AOGCM projections, increasing confidence in future risk. Hatched 
areas show regions that are currently unsuitable, but become suitable in at least one projection. A) Spotted knapweed 
distribution is affected mainly by temperature, and is projected to expand upwards in elevation, but to contract at lower 
elevations (dark blue areas). B) Cheatgrass distribution is affected mainly by precipitation, and is projected to expand into 
wetter areas, but to contract from drier areas as overall water availability decreases in the West. Source: Reprinted from 
Bradley et al. 2009. 


CO2 has been found to increase invasion in grasslands 
(Dukes et al. 2011; but see Williams et al. 
2007), desert (Smith et al. 2000), and forests (Hattenschwiler 
and Korner 2003; Belote et al. 2004) 
in some years. Carbon dioxide also increases plant 
water-use efficiency, and may be most likely to favor 
invasive species in water-limited ecosystems (Dukes 
2002), as observed in the Nevada desert (Smith et 
al. 2000). Carbon dioxide can exacerbate nitrogen 
limitation, 
however (Luo et al. 2004), and may be 
least likely to favor invasive species in environments 
with low available nitrogen. 

Interactive Effects of Global Changes on Invasive 
Weeds 

The combined effects of multiple global changes 
on invasion are difficult to predict, but could have 
serious consequences for perennial agricultural 
systems. For example, in mixed-grass prairie, the 
combination of increased winter precipitation and 
simulated N deposition increased invasion much 
more than the sum of the two individual changes 
(Blumenthal et al. 2008). In contrast, while elevated 
CO2 and N increased yellow starthistle (Centaurea 
solstitialis) biomass 6-fold and 3-fold, respectively, 
in California grassland, their combined effects were 
additive (Dukes et al. 2011). Multiple global changes 
may also influence invasion through interactions 
with fire. Both elevated CO2 and severe droughts 
can favor fire-promoting invasive grasses in western 
U.S. rangelands (Smith et al. 2000; Brooks 2003; 
Ziska et al. 2005; Scott et al. 2010; Mazzola et al. 
2011). At the same time, warmer temperatures and 
earlier cessation of cool-season precipitation are 
expected to increase the number and intensity of fires 
(Abatzoglou and Kolden 2011). The likely result is 
further transformation of diverse native rangelands 
into near-monocultures of invasive grasses (Bradley 
2009; Abatzoglou and Kolden 2011). 

Adaptation 

Managing agronomic and invasive weeds under 
climate change requires attention to: (1) changes in 
the distribution and diversity of weed threats; (2) 
changes in the vulnerability of crop production to 
weed limitations under the range of weed management 
practices currently in use; and (3) risks posed 
by new weeds, including those not yet introduced to 
the United States. 

The first step in adapting weed management to 
climate change is to determine which weeds will 
threaten agricultural production in the future, and 
where they will be most problematic. Although temperature 
and water have often been used to delineate 
vegetative zones, weed habitat is rarely included in 
those mapping efforts. To rectify this, innovative 
researchers are utilizing biogeographical models to 
assess future weed threats related to climate change. 
For example, warming temperatures are predicted 
to lead to considerable turnover in the set of damaging 
weed species for any given agricultural field 
(McDonald et al. 2009). Although a number of 
studies have projected species-specific range shifts 
for invasive plants (for examples, see Bradley et 
al. 2010a), projections for agronomic species are 
rare. Furthermore, predictions of weed distribution 
rarely include weed effects, a problem that could 
be addressed by increasing the use of the abundant 
data provided by biogeographical modeling (Leibold 
1995; McDonald et al. 2009; Kulhanek et al. 2011). 
For now, as a general rule of thumb, managers can 
look to neighboring States in the South for insight 
on what the damaging weeds of the future will be 
(McDonald et al. 2009). In the future, models may 
allow for species- and location-specific predictions of 
the effects of weeds. 

Weed management includes the identification and 
implementation of cultural, mechanical, chemical, 
and biological options to prevent or maintain weed 
populations at acceptable levels. Effects of CO2 and/ 
or climate change on herbicide efficacy have only 
been examined in a handful of studies, but are likely 
to depend on the mode of action, the weed species, 
and on competitive interactions (Archambault et al. 
2001). For example, although elevated CO2 had no 
effect on the sensitivity of redroot pigweed, a weed 
that in large doses may prove toxic to animals grazing 
on it, to the most commonly used herbicide in 
the United States (glyphosate), sensitivity of lambsquarters, 
a commonly occurring weed, to glyphosate 
was reduced, such that the full, recommended dosage 
suppressed, but did not eliminate, growth (Ziska et 
al. 1999). Similarly, elevated CO2 reduced the efficacy 
of glyphosate against Canada thistle (Cirsium 
arvense), quackgrass (Elytrigia repens) (Ziska and 
Teasdale 2000), and a number of exotic C4 grasses 
(Manea et al. 2011), and the efficacy of glufosinate 
(a cell membrane disruptor) against Canada thistle 
(Ziska and Teasdale 2000). 

Experimental data assessing the effects of climate 
and CO2 change on mechanical, biological and 
cultural weed control are almost non-existent. Yet 
management strategies may also change in efficacy 
with changing climate and CO2 concentrations. For 
example, tillage could be affected by rising CO2, 
with a faster time to vegetative cover, but less time 
for field operations. Rising CO2 levels could also 
increase asexual reproduction (e.g., Rogers et al. 
1992; Ziska et al. 2004), further limiting mechanical 
control. Precipitation extremes of drought or 
flood could also hinder field operations. The efficacy 

Chapter 4 


of biocontrol agents (e.g., insects) is dependent on 
synchrony between various aspects of the plant community. 
While global changes may disrupt relationships 
between invasive weeds and biocontrol agents, 
it may be possible to anticipate such changes by 
matching prospective agents to predicted future distributions 
as well as present distributions of invasive 
species (Thomson et al. 2010). Cultural weed management 
may also interact with changes in climate 
and/or changes in CO2. For example, flooding is used 
for weed control in rice. Climate change is anticipated 
to affect water supply through its influence on 
glacial runoff, snowpack, or drought severity (IPCC 
2007; Kerr 2007). 

It will also be important to account for climate 
change in policies that limit introduction and movement 
of new, potentially invasive species. The 
combination of changing environments and changing 
patterns of trade is likely to increase both the risks 
posed by and the supply of species adapted to warm, 
dry environments (Bradley et al. 2012). For example, 
as limited water supplies in the western United States 
increase demand for drought-tolerant horticultural 
species, many of which are exotic, risks of introducing 
species capable of invading this relatively dry 
region increase. By incorporating such predictions 
into risk assessments, and associated policies, it may 
be possible to reduce the number of invasive species 
that need to be managed in the future. 

Insect Pests 

The geographic ranges of insect pests are limited 
by the presence of the plants upon which they 
feed, and the ability of the insects to survive winter 
temperatures. However, through local dispersal and 
long-distance migration, some insects may reinvade 
colder regions annually. Spring emergence is 
generally defined by temperature, whereas winter 
dormancy is cued by photoperiod or a combination 
of photoperiod and temperature. Insects are capable 
of withstanding all but the most extreme precipitation 
events, thus rainfall affects growth and survival 
principally through increased cloud cover, which 
can reduce activity, and changes in the nutritional 
quality of the plants upon which insects feed. Insects, 
especially small ones and those with aquatic life 
stages, will desiccate and die without ready access to 
water. Humidity influences the prevalence of insect 
diseases, as well as plant diseases that insects carry. 
Although food quality is important to their growth, 
survival of many insects is dependent upon predation 
in natural ecosystems with chemical, biological, 
and microbial controls used to suppress pests, and 
sometimes their predators, below their natural level 
in agroecosystems. 

Air Temperature Effects on Insect Pests 

Generally, increasing air temperature is beneficial 
to insect pests. As long as upper critical limits are 
not exceeded, rising temperatures accelerate every 
aspect of an insects life cycle, and warmer winters 
reduce winter mortality. Although increased 
summer temperatures also favor growth of insect 
populations, extension of the growing season has a 
proportionately 
greater effect on the damage insects 
inflict on their host plants (Bradshaw and Holzapfel 
2010). Moreover, pests greater nutrient demands in 
early spring and autumn coincide with the planting 
and fruiting stages  stages that are particularly 
vulnerable for many crops and critically important 
for successful production. 

Increasing air temperature has resulted in reduced 
cold stress without substantial increase in heat 
stress (Bradshaw and Holzapfel 2006), although 
decreased soil temperatures in areas with reduced 
frequency of snow cover can result in greater winter 
insect mortality (Bale and Hayward 2010) because 
arousal from winter dormancy is generally dependent 
on accumulated temperature (growing-degree 
days). Research shows examples of insect phenology 
advancing faster than previously experienced 
within a season (Gordo and Sanz 2006; Harrington 
et al. 2007; Gregory et al. 2009; Bale and Hayward 
2010). Some insects spawning multiple generations 
per season have responded to longer growing seasons 
by producing more generations per year (Tobin et al. 
2008; Altermatt 2010), which, in addition to adding 
more insects to the environment, can lead to pests 
developing greater resistance to insecticides (May 
and Dobson 1986). 

The overall positive influence of increasing air 
temperature on expansion of insect geographical 
ranges is well documented in natural systems, 
although some insects ranges have shifted and others 
have contracted (Walther et al. 2002; Parmesan and 
Yohe 2003; Parmesan 2006; Walther 2010). Earlier 
migration and maturation result in successful 
colonization of habitats that were formerly outside 
an insect populations range (Bale and Hayward 
2010). However, as is the case for crops, insects have 
optimal temperatures under which they thrive, so not 
all insect populations will increase with increasing 
temperature. 

Increased winter survival in newly colonized habitats 
also contributes to successful expansion (Crozier 
2004). Less work has been done in agroecosystems, 
but Diffenbaugh et al. (2008) projected range expansion 
of the corn earworm, European corn borer, and 
the Northern and Western corn rootworms in the 
United States based upon tolerance to minimum 

Chapter 4 


 as is the case for crops, 
insects have optimal 
temperatures under 
which they thrive, so not 
all insect populations will 
increase with increasing 
temperature. 


absolute temperature, number of hours below -10C, 
and the required growing-degree days in the first half 
of the year. Models project that geographic ranges 
will expand for all four species by 2100, indicating 
that insects from diverse life styles may be affected 
similarly by recent and future temperature changes 
(Diffenbaugh et al. 2008). 

Projected increases of extreme precipitation events 
could make pest population outbreaks and crashes 
more common (Hawkins and Holyoak 1998; Srygley 
et al. 2010). Pest outbreaks are often associated with 
dry years (White 1984), although extreme drought 
is unfavorable to insects (Hawkins and Holyoak 
1998). Extremely wet years are also unfavorable 
(Fuhrer 2003). Under changing climate, environmental 
thresholds currently keeping some pests 
in check may be exceeded because of increased 
variability, making pest outbreaks likely to become 
more common as a result of increased climate variability. 
Phenological shifts and geographical range 
shifts in interacting species can be synchronous or 
asynchronous, and as a result may have important 
ramifications on pest population (Hance et al. 2007; 
Memmott et al. 2007; Hegland et al. 2009). For 
example, as a result of warming over the last century, 
the larch budmoths range has shifted to the distributional 
limit of its host, dampening a millenniumlong 
cycle in outbreaks of the moth (Johnson and 
McNicol 2010). As another example, the northward 
expansion of crop ranges may have altered aphid 
community composition. In Europe, autumn sowing 
of winter wheat, barley, and rape provides a substrate 
for parthenogenic, non-diapausing aphids to survive 
the winter (Roos et al. 2011). In Poland, changes in 
winter survival of parthenogenic aphids may have 
resulted in a shift in species composition to fewer 
aphid species with sexual forms in their life cycles. 

Blood-sucking and tissue-feeding insects and ticks 
on livestock may also be affected by climate change. 
One clear example is the recent emergence of bluetongue 
virus in Europe (Wittmann and Beylis 2000). 
The geographic range of bluetongues principle Old 
World vector, the midge Culicoides imicola, has 
expanded northward into southern Europe; with the 
midge came several introductions of bluetongue. 
Once European midges picked up the virus, they 
transmitted it beyond its traditional range, increasing 
its range up to 800 km further north than was the 
case prior to 1998. 

Effects of Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 
on Insect/Pests 

The effects of increased atmospheric CO2 on insect 
pests is much more complex than that of increasing 
temperature because insect performance is 
highly dependent on the response of the host plant 
to increased CO2. This indirect action of CO2 makes 
for quite variable interactions between plants and 
insect pest. Generally, increasing C to N (C:N) ratios 
in plants under increased enhanced atmospheric CO2 
makes nutritionally poorer forage for insects. However, 
compensatory feeding can offset an insects N 
needs (DeLucia et al. 2008; Johnson and McNicol 
2010), and addition of N to the soil can also moderate 
the influence of CO2 on insect performance by 
restoring the C:N ratio that is observed in plants 
under present-day conditions (Tylianakis et al. 2008). 

Nitrogen limitations can cause plants to produce 
fewer of the secondary metabolites that are involved 
in developing resistance to insect pests (Zavala et 
al. 2008), while enhanced CO2 fixation can increase 
C-based defenses that reduce the digestibility of a 
given crop for insects (Stiling and Cornelissen 2007). 
For example, enhanced CO2 fixation by soybeans 
increases leaf toughness, but there is a coincident 
decrease of a plants production of N-based compounds 
such as cysteine proteinase inhibitors  proteins 
that defend soybean from beetles (Gregory et al. 
2009). Although most insects would find a plant with 
decreased N-based defenses more appealing, some 
specialized insects that cue on those specific secondary 
compounds to stimulate feeding will feed less. 

Evidence also exists that micronutrients are less 
available with increasing CO2 (Loladze 2002), which 
can reduce the quality of plants used for forage. Ultimately 
the effect of increased CO2 on insects is quite 
variable, with some insects growing more slowly and 
maturing at smaller sizes, and others growing more 
quickly and becoming larger (Stiling and Cornelissen 
2007). A review of the net effects of elevated CO2 on 
crops and forages with insect herbivores (Table 4.2) 
suggests that beetles and aphids generally perform 
better, to the detriment of the plants, while moths 
often eat more and achieve similar weights. 

Projections of insect distributions and abundance 
with climate change (Table 4.3) have different underlying 
assumptions. In some projections, an insects 
existing geographic range is used to estimate critical 
temperatures that define its habitat boundaries. Then 
the change in mean global air temperature projected 
to accompany a doubling of CO2 is used to investigate 
how the range might change in the future. To 
estimate effects of gradual changes in temperature 
on range or abundance, a series of step increases in 
ambient temperatures are also applied to the critical 
thermal parameters that define the insects range. 
These models have advantages in their simplicity, 
but one critical assumption is that the host plants will 
show a similar change and may be available in newly 

Chapter 4 


colonized geographic range areas. Other significant 
assumptions of many model inputs are that there will 
be no effects on plant tissue composition that might 
affect the tissues nutritional value, or that the secondary 
metabolites involved in attracting beneficial 
insects or defending the plant from harmful insects 
will be modified with temperature changes. 

Agronomists and modelers are aware that the large 
uncertainties in precipitation can expand the modeled 
outcomes (Olfert and Weiss 2006). Modeling 
additional trophic levels, such as the response of 
host plants or parasitoids to temperature, make the 
assumptions more realistic (Gutierrez et al. 2008). 
Some projections have applied predictions from 

Chapter 4 

Table 4.2. Net effect of pest herbivory on crop, forage, and invasive plants in elevated CO2. Beetles and aphids generally 
perform better to the detriment of the plants; caterpillars typically eat more but enhanced plant growth results in little net 
effect. Host Species Effect Codes: (-) plant likely to be harmed by increased pest performance. (+) plant performance is 
likely to increase because insect performance decreases. ( ) equivocal or neutral results, i.e., insect and plant performances 
increase more or less equally. Sources : 1Heagle et al. 1994, 2Karban and Thaler 1999, 3Joutei et al. 2000, 4ONeill et al. 
2008, 5Dermody et al. 2008, 6Johnson and McNicol 2010, 7Salt et al. 1995, 8Smith and Jones 1998, 9Butler et al. 1986, 10Sun 
et al. 2011, 11Li et al. 2011, 12Awmack et al. 1997, 13Chen et al. 2004, 14Bezemer et al. 1998, 15Himanen et al. 2008, 16ONeill 
et al. 2011, 17Lincoln et al. 1984, 18Osbrink et al. 1987, 19Lincoln and Couvet 1989, 20Marks and Lincoln 1996, 21Akey et 
al. 1988, 22Chen et al. 2005, 23Wu et al. 2006, 24Karowe and Migliaccio 2011, 25Johnson and Lincoln 1990, 26Johnson and 
Lincoln 1991, and 27Heagle 2003. 

 
Order Herbivore Species Host Species 
Effect 
on 
Host 
Acarina Tetranychus urticae (red spider mite) 
Trifolium repens1 (white clover) 
Gossypium hirsutum2 (upland cotton) 
Phaseolus vulgaris3 (kidney bean) 
-
-
+ 
Coleoptera 
Popillia japonica (Japanese beetle) Glycine max4 (soybean) - 
Diabrotica virgifera (western corn rootworm) Glycine max4 (soybean) - 
Sitona lepidus (clover root weevil) Trifolium repens6 (white clover) - 
Diptera 
Pegomya nigritarsis (leaf-mining fly) 
Rumex crispus (invasive dock) 
R. obtusifolius7 (invasive dock) 
-
- 
Chromatomyla syngenesiae (leaf-mining fly) 
Sonchus oleraceus8 
(invasive sow thistle) + 
Bemisia tabaci (sweet potato white fly) Gossypium9-11 (cotton)  
Hemiptera 
Aulacorthum solani (glasshouse potato aphid) Vicla faba12 (broad bean) - 
Stiobion avenae (grain aphid) Triticum aestivum13 (spring wheat) - 
Myzus persicae (green peach aphid) 
Poa annua14 (grass) 
Brassica napus15 (oilseed rape) 
-
+ 
Brevicoryne brassicae (cabbage aphid) Brassica napus15 (oilseed rape)  
Aphis glycines (soybean aphid) Glycine max5,16 (soybean) - 
Hymenoptera 
Aphidius matricariae 
(green peach aphid parasitoid) 
Poa annua14 (grass)  
Lepidoptera 
Pseudoplusia includens (soybean looper) Glycine max17 (soybean) - 
Trichoplusia ni (cabbage looper) Phaseolus lunata18 (lima bean)  
Spodoptera eridania (southern armyworm) Mentha piperita19 (peppermint)  
Spodoptera frugiperda (fall armyworm) Festuca arundinaceae20 (tall fescue)  
Pectinophora gossypiella (pink bollworm) Gossypium hirsutum21 (upland cotton)  
Helicoverpa armigera (cotton bollworm) 
Gossypium22 (cotton) 
Triticum aestivum23 (spring wheat) 
+
+ 
Colias philodice (clouded sulfur butterfly) 
Trifolium repens24 (white clover) 
Medicago sativa24 (alfalfa) 
Lotus corniculatus24 (birdsfoot trefoil) 
 
Orthoptera 
Melanoplus sanguinipes (migratory grasshopper) Artemisia tridentata25 (sage)  
Melanoplus differentialis (differential grasshopper) Artemisia tridentata26 (sage) - 
Thysanoptera Frankliniella occidentalis (western flower thrip) Trifolium repens27 (white clover) + 
two or more global circulation models reduced 
to the region of interest to compare their effects 
on projected insect responses to climate change 
(Newman 2006; Trnka et al. 2007). 

The most common model projections for pest insects 
show an expansion or shift in range with increasing 
temperature (Table 4.3). For example, corn earworm, 
European corn borer, and the Northern and Western 
corn rootworms are expected to expand their ranges 
northward in the United States into what is currently 
unsuitable habitat (Diffenbaugh et al. 2008). 
Swede midge is projected to expand into the northern 
Midwest and central Canada (Mika et al. 2008). Pink 

Chapter 4 

Table 4.3. Projected effects of climate change on agricultural pest insects. 1Jeffree and Jeffree 1996, 2Kocmankova et al. 
2011, 3Diffenbaugh et al. 2008, 4Olfert and Weiss 2006a, 5Stephens et al. 2007, 6Gutierrez et al. 2009, 7Mika and Newman 
2010, 8Mika et al. 2008, 9Musolin et al. 2010, 10Gutierrez et al. 2008, 11Harrington et al. 2007, 12Newman 2006, 13Newman 
2005, 14Porter et al. 1991, 15Trnka et al. 2007, 16Gutierrez et al. 2006, 17Olfert and Weiss 2006b, 18Bergant et al. 2005. Note 
that small body size generally results in lower fecundity and higher mortality. Larger body size results in higher fecundity 
and higher survival. 

Herbivore Species Simulation Region Response 
Coleoptera 
Leptinotarsa decemlineata 
(Colorado beetle) 
2x CO2 Europe range expansion1 
2021-2100 central Europe northward expansion of additional generations per year2 
Diabrotica barberi 
(Northern corn rootworm) 
2071-2099 U.S.A. 
range expansion3 
Diabrotica virgifera 
(Western corn rootworm) 
range expansion3 
Ceutorhynchus obstrictus 
(cabbage seedpod weevil) +1-7C 
60% of 
precipitation 
Canada 
range expansion and greater abundance, inhibited by increased 
precipitation4 
Meligethes viridescens 
(rape blossom beetle) 
range expansion and greater abundance4 
Oulema melanopus 
(cereal leaf beetle) 
range expansion and greater abundance, sensitive to precipitation4 
Diptera 
Batrocera dorsalis 
(oriental fruitfly) 
2080 U.S.A. range expansion following invasion5 
Batrocera oleae (olive fly) +1-3C California 
shift northward and to coastal areas, contraction in Central Valley and 
deserts6 
Liriomyza huldobrensis 
(pea leaf-miner) 
2020-80s North America range GCM dependent7 
Contarinia nasturtii 
(swede midge) 
2020-80s 
Canada & 
U.S.A. 
westward shift to central Canada and Northern Great Plains; optimal 
range GCM dependent8 
Hemiptera 
Nezara viridula 
(Southern green stinkbug) 
+2-2.5C Japan 
additional generation, smaller summer and larger autumn body size, 
greater winter survival9 
Planococcus ficus 
(vine mealybug) 
+2-3C California 
increases in abundance across extant range due to reduced biological 
control10 
Aphis, Brevicoryne, Myzus, 
etc. (aphids) 
2050 Europe 8-day advance in first flight1 
Rhopalosiphum padi, etc. 
(cereal aphids) 
2080s Canada 
increased abundance in northern or coastal regions, less abundant in 
southern or central regions, depending on climate model12 
Rhopalosiphum padi, etc. 
(cereal aphids) 
2080s Great Britain 5-92% decline in abundance in southern England13 
Lepidoptera 
Ostrinia nubilalis 
(European corn borer) 
+1C Europe range expansion 165-665 km north14 
2x CO2 Europe range expansion 1220 km north; additional generation annually14 
2021-2100 central Europe northward expansion of additional generations per year2 
2025-2050 central Europe spring advancement, additional generation, northward range expansion15 
2071-2099 U.S.A. range expansion to occupy all of lower 48 except Rocky Mountains3 
Heliothis zea (corn earworm) 2071-2099 U.S.A. northward range expansion to upper Midwest3 
Pectinophora gossypiella 
(pink bollworm) 
+0.5-2.5C California 
little change at or below 1 C; at 1.5 C and above, expansion into Central 
Valley and population increases in extant range16 
Orthoptera 
Melanoplus sanguinipes +1-7C Canada increased range and abundance17 
Thysanoptera 
Thrips tabaci (onion thrips) 
2021-2050 
Slovakia 
0.5-4 additional generations per year18 
2051-2080 0.9-6.9 additional generations per year18 
bollworm is predicted to expand its range into the 
Central Valley of California (Gutierrez et al. 2006), 
and olive fly is projected to shift its range from the 
Central Valley and desert regions northward and 
westward to coastal habitats (Gutierrez et al. 2009). 
In addition to shifting range, additional generations 
being born during a single season have been 
projected for insects such as the Colorado beetle, 
the European corn borer, and onion thrips in central 
Europe, and the southern green stinkbug in Japan 
(Table 4.3). Consequently, insect abundances are also 
projected to increase. The diversity of insects modeled 
lends credence to the suggestion that these modeled 
predictions may extend to many insects capable 
of more than one generation per year in U.S. regions 
with similar projected increases of temperature. 

Projections are generally made with the assumption 
that the traits defining the insects range, phenology, 
and abundance will not evolve. This is true in 
so far as there is no evidence that novel climatic 
tolerances have evolved on an ecological time scale 
that allows a species to inhabit a previously hostile 
environment (Parmesan 2006). However, even if 
the species as a whole does not evolve, populationlevel 
genetic changes could have large local consequences. 
Researchers have documented rapid shifts 
in a populations critical photoperiod so that the 
insects migrate or diapause (i.e., go into a dormant 
state) later in autumn in accordance with an extended 
growing season (Bradshaw and Holzapfel 2001; 
Gomi et al. 2007). At the edge of their range, insects 
abilities to disperse may also change, as made 
evident by newly colonized habitats having insects 
with larger flight muscles and more active metabolic 
enzymes (Haag et al. 2005; Hill et al. 2011). 

Insect Vectors of Pathogens 

Aphids are important vectors of plant pathogens. 
Their short generation times make them likely to 
gain from global warming with a high risk of damage 
to crops. Range expansion of both the aphids and the 
pathogens they transmit will also result in increased 
genotypic diversity, making resistance to control 
efforts more likely to evolve (May and Dobson 
1986). For example, green peach aphid populations 
are becoming more genetically variable in Scotland 
in association with warmer winters and earlier 
dispersal (Malloch et al. 2006). Projected changes in 
cereal aphid abundance in Canada in 2080 were temperature 
dependent, with increases in aphid populations 
predicted in more northerly latitudes or coastal 
regions, whereas southern or central regions had 
projected decreases, depending on the climate model 
(Newman 2006). Note that these projections are very 
different from the uniform decrease in cereal aphid 
abundance projected for southern Great Britain due 
to interactions of increased CO2 and limited N in a 
region that will experience greater drought (Newman 
2005); projections of the response of an aphid 
parasitoid to climate change in Great Britain did not 
qualitatively alter the projections for the effects of 
climate change on the parasitoids cereal aphid hosts 
(Hoover and Newman 2004). 

Adaptation 

With more pests shifting northward, generation times 
decreasing, and abundances increasing in the future, 
management costs are expected to increase due to 
more frequent application of pesticides. For example, 
pesticide applications to control lepidopteran pests 
(e.g., moths) on sweet corn decrease with increase in 
latitude from 15 to 32 times per year in Florida, four 
to eight times per year in Delaware, and zero to five 
times per year in New York (Hatfield et al. 2011). 
It can also be expected that resistance to chemical 
control agents will evolve more rapidly because of 
the increased genotypic diversity that comes with 
pest insects range expansion and greater numbers of 
generations of particular pests undergoing selection 
for resistant forms each year (May and Dobson 
1986). Crop diversification and landscape management 
for natural pest control can result in greater 
suppression of pest outbreaks and pathogen transmission 
in a changing climate (Lin 2011). It is also likely 
that some biological control agents will become less 
effective due to mismatched sensitivity between 
agent and effects on pests due to changes in the environment 
that increase pest resistance. For example, 
with increases in temperature, the vine mealybug 
is projected to find refuge from parasitoids introduced 
for its control in California vineyards, as the 

Chapter 4 


Insects and Trade 

There are some very specific Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service (APHIS) regulations 
that allow import/export of a commodity 
that might have a quarantine pest on it to 
specific locations, during specific times of 
the year when the weather is considered 
so unfavorable for the pest that if the pest 
were present and if it escaped into the 
environment, it would have a zero chance of 
surviving and reproducing. If climate changes 
and the receiving location becomes habitable 
for the pest, then some of the regulations may 
need to change. 


parasitoids 
cannot survive under increased temperature 
(Gutierrez et al. 2008). Thus, the performance of 
candidate biological control agents under changing 
climate conditions will need to be assessed prior to 
selection and use. 

Pathogens 

Plant Pathogens 

With non-vector-borne pathogens, plant pathogen 
responses to climate change must be considered 
within the context of a disease triangle that 
involves the pathogen, the host, and the environment; 
together these component parts determine whether 
a disease, itself a process, will occur (Agrios 2005). 
With vector-borne pathogens, the vector must be 
included in the disease triangle, with the microbial 
pathogen, the host, and the vector all interacting 
separately with the environment (e.g., Thresh 1983). 
In addition to having the basic components  pathogen, 
host and vector  as the required drivers of plant 
disease, plant pathogens and their vectors are influenced 
by other factors that complicate our ability to 
predict pathogen movement, incidence, severity, and 
evolution (Van der Putten et al. 2010). 

Under current climate conditions, even with efforts to 
manage disease in place, crop losses to pathogens are 
estimated to be approximately 11% of overall worldwide 
production (Oerke 2006). Pathogen growth and 
reproduction can be evaluated independently with 
regard to the epidemiological parameters necessary 
for disease development (i.e., cardinal temperatures 
and responses to individual atmospheric influences). 
These effects have been determined for some pathogenic 
viruses, fungi, and bacteria, leading to weatherbased 
decision-support models designed to address 
seasonal production issues and disease management 
protocols (Jones et al. 2010; Savary et al. 2011). One 
of the first comprehensive reviews of the potential 
effects of climate change on plant disease recognized 
that it would most certainly affect plant disease at 
many levels of complexity, although generalizations 
would be difficult to make (Coakley et al. 1999). 
More than 10 years later, this remains true, in spite of 
significant progress in defining parameters potentially 
driving plant disease processes in a changing 
climate. 

Yield and quality losses caused by diseases are 
influenced by 1) the direct consequences of climate 
change, e.g., increased temperatures, elevated CO2 
concentrations, altered rainfall patterns, drought and 
greater wind speeds; 2) regional alterations in areas 
cropped and ranges of crops grown, and 3) changes 
in vector ranges and activity. These factors alter the 
geographic ranges and relative abundance of pathogens, 
their rates of spread, the effectiveness of host 
resistances, the physiology of host-pathogen interactions, 
rates of pathogen evolution and host adaptation, 
and the effectiveness of control measures (Jones 
2009). Effects of such changes on the frequency and 
duration of epidemics will vary depending on the 
pathosystem involved and geographic location, as 
well as continued environmental conditions that are 
conducive to the pathogens survival and thriving 
(e.g., moisture and temperature conditions) (Garrett 
et al. 2006). 

Chapter 4 


Role of Scale in Disease/Pests 

Pests and diseases offer particular challenges for predicting and adapting to climate change effects 
because of the strong temporal and spatial correlation produced by their spread (Garrett et al., 2011; 
Shaw and Osborne, 2011). Greater pathogen or pest reproduction in one place and time will have 
important effects on risk in other places and times. New invasive species may have impacts greater 
than the impacts of climate change. These two forms of global change need to be considered together 
(Anderson et al., 2004; Coakley et al., 1999). Adaptation strategies will need to consider how regional 
patterns of cropping areas may change in response to climate change, and how this may change risks for 
transmission (Coakley et al., 1999; Margosian et al., 2009).Disease and pests are thus also an example 
of how management may need to adapt at multiple scales to changes in risk. Farmers must be prepared 
with strategies for addressing new types or degrees of problems, crop insurance programs may need 
to adapt, pesticide manufacturers may need to modify production, plant breeders may need to change 
their breeding priorities, decision-support systems and other management support systems may need 
modification, extension services may need to more frequently update their training programs, and 
policies related to management may need to be altered. 


Extreme weather events projected with climate 
change include episodes of torrential rain with strong 
winds, in addition to heat waves and droughts, all 
of which influence plant pathogen epidemics (Jones 
2009). Also, the rate of spread of contact-transmitted 
viruses will be accelerated through greater plant 
wounding arising from intense storms that feature 
torrential rainfall, or hail and high winds. 

It was hypothesized that elevated ozone (resulting 
in increased plant tissue necrosis) would lead to 
increased disease by fungal necrotrophs, whereas 
elevated CO2 was predicted to favor infection by 
fungal biotrophs. In some cases these hypotheses 
have proven true, but there are also many examples 
where the opposite effects have been observed 
(Eastburn et al. 2011). It is evident that these types of 
effects are difficult to predict, due in part to the nonlinear 
biological responses of pathogens to increased 
CO2, ozone, temperature, and humidity (Garrett et al. 
2011). The majority of the studies that measure the 
effects of these parameters on pathogen growth are 
not able to incorporate all of the potential changes 
that may take place, particularly where including the 
host in conjunction with the pathogen or vector is 
logistically challenging. 

In a thorough review, Garrett et al. (2006) provide 
a framework for considering climate change effects 
across multiple changing variables, with individual 
plant responses to single factors such as increased 
CO2 or temperature well characterized for many crop 
plants. Generally, if host-plant survival can be linked 
to a single factor that overrides all others, then pathogen 
survival can likewise be linked to this overriding 
factor. For example, increased plant growth associated 
with elevated CO2 can result in a canopy that 
is more conducive to fungal foliar diseases due to 
higher humidity occurring at the microclimate level 
(Pangga et al. 2011). 

Increasing temperature may cause plant stress or may 
decrease plant stress depending on whether a crop is 
being grown in its optimal range or near a heat-tolerance 
threshold. Unfortunately, rarely does a single 
plant-growth or -health factor change as a result of 
climate change. When a combination of changes 
exist that result in temperatures, for example, that are 
no longer ideal for the crop host, this effect can be 
compounded when the change coincidently favors 
increased growth, formation of spores, earlier initial 
infection, shorter latent periods, or increased rates of 
disease progress (Campbell and Madden 1990). 

More recently, studies involving pathogens in Free 
Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) facilities have combined 
variations in CO2 and ozone concentrations 
while measuring effects on multiple pathogens. 
Work by Eastburn et al. (2010) at a FACE facility 
evaluated the effects of increased CO2 and ozone 
on downy mildew, brown spot, and sudden death 
syndrome (SDS) in soy crops. Elevated CO2 alone or 
in combination with increased ozone reduced downy 
mildew, increased brown spot severity (associated 
with changes in soybean canopy structure), and had 
no effect on SDS. 

In addition to field studies, understanding hostpathogen 
interactions related to climate change has 
dramatically improved as a result of new molecular 
research methods. For example, elevated CO2 has 
been shown to induce non-specific plant defense 
responses effective against Potato virus Y (Matros et 
al. 2006). 

Information on the influence of changing climate 
on crop development, physical structure, and 
biochemistry 
is critical for determining pathogen 
response. For example, pathogens that require entry 
via plant stomata are likely to encounter conditions 
of increased cuticular wax and higher stomatal 
resistance (Eastburn et al. 2011). Changes in wax 
composition will also likely affect plant-pathogen 
biochemical interactions that influence infection 
processes (Eastburn et al. 2011). 

Drought and heat stress may affect the expression of 
crop resistance genes that would normally provide 
protection from pathogens, but even this can be variable 
within a given host, depending on the resistance 
genes present. The effectiveness of some plant genes 
for resistance to virus diseases is known to be temperature 
sensitive; for instance, the gene for Tobacco 
mosaic virus (TMV) resistance is markedly reduced 
in efficacy above 28C (Samuel 1931). This same 
temperature effect has been observed in transgenic 
tomato plants containing the same gene (Witham 
et al. 1996). Transient expression of the resistance 
genes for TMV (N gene) or Potato virus X (potato 
Rx gene) in a model system further demonstrated the 
reduced efficacy of these genes at high temperatures 
(Wang et al. 2009). Conversely, some resistance 
genes have been found to be more effective at higher 
temperature. One example of this is the wheat gene 
Yr36, which confers resistance to many races of the 
wheat stripe rust at temperatures between 25C and 
35C, but loses the resistance at lower temperatures 
(Uauy et al. 2005). Similarly, the bacterial blight 
resistance gene Xa7 restricts disease more effectively 
at high temperatures than at low temperatures, 
although the crop and the pathogen are both present 
during cool and warm production seasons (Webb et 
al. 2010). 

Chapter 4 

Drought and heat stress 
may affect the expression 
of crop resistance genes 
that would normally 
provide protection from 
pathogens, but even this 
can be variable within a 
given host, depending 
on the resistance genes 
present. 


Increased temperature decreases efficacy of plant 
antiviral resistance mechanisms based on gene 
silencing, a process by which a plant gene is turned 
off so that it does not respond to the presence of a 
virus (Webb et al. 2010). 

In the face of climate-related change, cultural control 
measures are likely to be less reliable in suppressing 
virus epidemics. Such techniques include planting 
upwind of virus sources when prevailing wind 
patterns vary, planting early maturing cultivars 
or harvesting early to avoid exposure of crops at 
peak insect vector flight times, and manipulation 
of sowing date to avoid coincidence of peak times 
for insect vector flights with vulnerable early crop 
growth (reviewed by Jones 2009). 

Changes in individual host-plant structure and 
shifts in range that affect whole crop populations 
result in significant alterations in microclimate, 
pathogen dynamics, and multi-trophic interactions 
(Pangga et al. 2011); these interactions have farreaching 
consequences. Range expansion has been 
predicted for many pathogens, based on models 
that incorporate changes in crop distribution and 
requirements for pathogen survival and reproduction 
(Savary et al. 2011). 

Other interactions will also contribute to potential 
outcomes. Most economically important plant 
viruses, for example, are vectored by insects (predominantly 
aphids, whiteflies, or thrips), mites, 
nematodes, or soil fungi. Plant viruses are responsible 
for more emerging diseases (due to increasing 
host numbers and/or expanded geographic ranges; 
reviewed in Fargette et al. 2006) worldwide than 
any other pathogen group (Anderson et al. 2004, 
reviewed in Jones, 2009). International movement 
of plant material that may be infected with virus(es) 
or infested with viruliferous vectors is a key route 
of human involvement in the emergence of virus 
diseases (e.g., Jones 2009; Chellemi et al. 2011; 
Navas-Castillo et al. 2011). 

Climate change is also likely to affect the emergence 
of virus diseases in new encounter scenarios when 
vulnerable, newly introduced crops or weeds are 
grown next to indigenous vegetation infected with 
viruses the new crops had not been exposed to previously. 
Although such circumstances have been relatively 
little studied (Jones 2009; Navas-Castillo et al. 
2011), it is well known that viruses with wide host 
ranges adapt to new plant hosts better than viruses 
with narrow host ranges (Jones 2009). 

Additionally, many viruses and associated vectors 
and some pathogens (see Asian soybean rust and 
the invasive weed kudzu, Eastburn et al. 2011) have 
non-crop (often weed) reservoirs that provide bridges 
between cropping periods (e.g., Adkins et al. 2011). 
Climate change is likely to indirectly affect virus diseases 
by altering the geographic range of both vectors 
and non-crop reservoirs, and the feeding habits 
of vectors (Canto et al. 2009; Jones 2009; Navas- 
Castillo et al. 2011). Projected climate changes are 
similarly predicted to alter populations and distributions 
of other insect, mite, nematode and soil fungi 
vectors of viruses and non-crop reservoirs, and thus 
the viruses transmitted or hosted, although effects 
are likely to vary by geographic region (reviewed in 
Jones, 2009). Examples include: 

 Increased temperatures in temperate regions, 
which result in earlier appearance of spring aphids 
(and hence earlier appearance of aphid-vectored 
viruses). In Mediterranean-type, subtropical and 
tropical regions, summer aphids may not survive 
the warmer conditions, thus reducing incidence of 
aphid-vectored viruses (Jones, 2009). 

 Increased temperatures and altered rainfall result 
in more favorable conditions for whitefly population, 
which can lead to a wider distribution of 
whitefly vectors (Morales and Jones 2004), and 
thus whitefly-transmitted viruses. 

 Like insect pests, there is also an increased 
potential for rapid changes in composition of 
pathogen communities due to greater numbers of 
reproductive cycles occurring under intensified 
crop management. This can lead to more rapid 
evolution of new races, which may compromise 
crop resistance strategies and result in resistance 
to currently used pesticides (Juroszek and von 
Tiedemann 2011) 

Livestock Pathogens 

Climate change may indirectly affect animal production 
by altering the frequency, intensity, or distribution 
of animal pathogens and parasites. Climate 
affects microbial density and distribution, the 
distribution of vector-borne diseases, host resistance 
to infections, food and water shortages, or foodborne 
diseases (Baylis and Githeko 2006; Gaughan 
et al. 2009; Thornton et al. 2009). Earlier springs 
and warmer winters may allow for greater proliferation 
and survivability of pathogens and parasites. 
For example, bluetongue was recently reported in 
Europe for the first time in 20 years (Baylis and 
Githeko, 2006). Regional warming and changes 
in rainfall distribution may lead to changes in the 
spatial or temporal distributions of diseases sensitive 
to moisture, such as anthrax, blackleg, hemorrhagic 
septicemia, and vector-borne diseases (Baylis and 

Chapter 4 


Githeko, 2006). Climate change also may influence 
the abundance and/or distribution of the competitors, 
predators, and parasites of vectors themselves 
(Thornton et al. 2009). Hotter weather may increase 
the incidence of ketosis, mastitis, and lameness in 
dairy cows and enhance growth of mycotoxin-producing 
fungi, particularly if moisture conditions are 
favorable (Gaughan et al. 2009). However, no consistent 
evidence exists that heat stress negatively affects 
overall immune function in cattle, chickens, or pigs. 

Conclusions 

Climate and climate change affect agriculture 
directly through the immediate effects of temperature, 
precipitation, and CO2. The growth and development 
of crops, rangelands, and livestock are also 
influenced indirectly by climate change, through its 
actions upon weeds, insects, and disease. These variables 
interact with one another to further influence 
agricultural outcomes. The complexities of the cropclimate-
environment interactions make projecting the 
net outcome of climate change difficult. Agricultural 
responses to climate change depend on the specific 
environmental and agroecosystem conditions, in 
combination with the characteristics of a given 
agricultural product. Some of these complexities will 
be further explored in the subsequent chapters, with 
information specific to particular agricultural systems 
found in Chapter 5 of this report. 

Chapter 4 


Aggregate Effects 

Agriculture is a complex system linked closely to 
climate through the direct effects of temperature, precipitation, 
solar radiation, and atmospheric composition 
on plant growth and yield, as well as livestock 
production. The soil and water resources of agricultural 
landscapes are linked with the same environmental 
factors. As the effects of climate change on 
soil, water, and environmental goods and services are 
examined, it becomes apparent that aggregate effects 
of climate transcend effects on individual agroecosystem 
components. For example, precipitation 
affects the potential amount of water available, however 
the actual amount of available water depends 
upon soil type, soil water holding capacity, and 
infiltration rate, such that the aggregate effect is not 
directly determined by precipitation amount. Actual 
climate change effects will thus depend on the cumulative 
effects of climate change factors on resources 
that are of key importance to agriculture, such as soil 
and water. Many of these effects are described by the 
following sections. 

Agricultural Soil Resources 

Soils provide ecosystem services that are necessary 
to society and the survival of life on the planet, 
including our own species. The roles soils play 
in delivering ecosystem services include nutrient 
cycling and the delivery of nutrients needed by growing 
plants. Soils act as a water filter and reservoir, 
purifying water as it passes through the soil substrate, 
and oftentimes providing water storage for later plant 
uptake. Soils also provide a structure for supporting 
plants and animals. They regulate climate through 
processes of carbon sequestration and uptake of other 
greenhouse gases. They contribute to conservation of 
ecosystem biodiversity and provide a direct source 
of human resources such as important minerals, peat, 
and clay (Dominati et al. 2010). 

A few of the many important ecosystem services 
provided by soils include provision of food, wood, 
fiber, and raw materials; flood mitigation; recycling 
of wastes; biological control of pests; provision of 
the physical support for roads and buildings, as well 
as cultural services, which include both general aesthetics 
and a sense of place (Dominati et al. 2010). 
Healthy soils have characteristics that include the 
appropriate levels of nutrients required for production 
of healthy plants, moderately high levels of 
organic matter, a structure that has a good aggregation 
of primary soil particles and macro-porosity, 
moderate pH levels, thickness sufficient to store 
adequate water for plants, a healthy microbial community, 
and absence of toxicity. 

It may be possible to draw inferences about the 
effects of climate change on agroecosystem services 
from observations about soil erosion and herbicide 
and nutrient movement from the edge of fields 
into adjacent areas. Erosion is a primary source 
for soil particles and agrochemicals transported 
from agricultural fields to streams and other water 
bodies. Under changing climate, some regions will 
experience greater drying, while other areas will 
have more intensive rainstorms or increased rate of 
snow melt  each of these factors may increase soil 
erosion. Movement of chemicals and soil material 
will affect the quality of water and will be affected 
by changes in the intensity of meteorological events. 
As soil erosion changes under climate change, so 
does the potential for associated offsite, non-point 
source pollution. Riparian buffers and wetlands often 
serve as sinks for pollutants moving from upland 
fields (Hill 1996; Mayer et al. 2007; Vidon 2010), 
thus making them important components in possible 
conservation practices for climate change adaptation 
in cases where offsite, non-point pollution is a 
concern. 

 

Soil Degradation and Soil Erosion 

Several processes, both natural and anthropogenic, 
act to degrade soils. These processes include erosion, 
compaction, salinization, toxification, and net loss 
of organic matter. Of these, soil erosion is the effect 
most directly affected by climate change and also the 
most pervasive. Soil erosion is a natural process and 


Chapter 5 

Climate Change Effects on
U.S. Agricultural Production 


occurs regardless of human activity; however, human 
activities, including intensive agriculture, have 
caused accelerated erosion across many regions of 
the planet, including the United States (Montgomery 
2007). Excessive erosion rates decrease soil productivity, 
increase loss of soil organic carbon and other 
essential nutrients, and reduce soil fertility (Quine 
and Zhang 2002; Cruse and Herndl 2009). The major 
factors affecting soil erosion are: (1) erosive effects 
of rainfall, irrigation, snowmelt, and wind; (2) plants, 
cropping, and management; (3) soil erodibility; (4) 
conservation practices; and (5) topography. Of these, 
climate change will most likely have the greatest 
effects on the first three, however strategies for adaptation 
to climate change effects generally are related 
to conservation practices (Delgado et al. 2011). 

Rainfall 

The most direct effect of climate change on rainfalldriven 
erosion is related to rainfalls erosive power 
(Favis-Mortlock and Savabi 1996; Williams et al. 
1996; Favis-Mortlock and Guerra 1999; Nearing 
2001; Pruski and Nearing 2002a, 2002b). The power 
or ability of a storm or series of precipitation events 
to cause soil erosion, or rainfall erosivity, is highly 
correlated with the interaction effect of storm energy 
and maximum prolonged precipitation intensity 
(Wischmeier 1959; Wischmeier and Smith 1965; 
Nearing et al. 1990; Nearing et al. 2005). With regard 
to erosivity, the dominant variable is rainfall intensity, 
which is the amount of rainfall reaching the soil 
surface per unit time, rather than total rainfall amount 
(Nearing et al. 2005). If both rainfall amount and 
intensity were to change together in a statistically 
representative manner, assuming temporally stationary 
relationships between amounts and intensities, 
the predicted erosion rate would increase on the 
order of 1.7% for every 1% increase in total rainfall 
(Pruski and Nearing 2002b) . 

Effects of changing climate on plant biomass will 
also affect rainfall-driven erosion. The mechanisms 
by which climate change affects biomass, and by 
which biomass changes affect runoff and erosion 
are complex (Williams et al. 1996; Favis-Mortlock 
and Guerra 1999; Pruski and Nearing 2002a). As an 
example, increases of atmospheric CO2 concentrations 
increase plant production rates for some species, 
which could translate into increased soil surface 
canopy cover and, more importantly, biological 
ground cover (Rosenzweig and Hillel 1998). Biological 
material, which includes materials such as ground 
cover and crop residue, comes in direct contact with 
the soil surface, and therefore such materials have a 
greater impact on effects of rain-driven erosion than 
plant canopy cover. Biological materials protect the 
soil from raindrop splash and substantively increase 
surface water flow roughness, which reduces flow 
velocities and the ability of water to move sediment. 
Conversely, increases in soil and air temperatures 
will trend toward faster rates of residue decomposition 
via increased microbial activity  the higher the 
temperature, the faster the microbes work. The rate 
of microbial activity is moderated by the amount of 
soil moisture, and, as is the case for all other organisms, 
beyond a critical temperature threshold the 
microbes die. Climate change may affect biomass 
production through changes in temperature and precipitation. 
Increased precipitation, for instance, could 
increase biomass production because of the removal 
of the water limitations on plant growth, which 
may in turn increase the amount of leaf litter on the 
ground and reduce effects of erosion. 

Temperature changes also affect biomass production 
levels and rates. Corn biomass production, for example, 
may increase with increasing temperature, particularly 
if the growing season is extended; however, 
biomass may decrease due to temperature stresses 
as temperatures become too high (Rosenzweig and 
Hillel, 1998). Studies have also shown that even 
in areas where the overall amount of precipitation 
may remain constant or decrease, erosion will likely 
still increase because of increased event intensities 
(Pruski and Nearing 2002a; Zhang et al. 2012). 

Irrigation 

To date, no large-scale studies or reviews exist that 
investigate the anticipated effects of climate change 
on future irrigation erosion rates. Only limited data 
have been published on irrigation-induced erosion 
(Reckendorf 1995; Sojka et al. 2007), however, 
existing data suggest that both sprinkler irrigation 
and surface irrigation (particularly in furrows) 
are susceptible to irrigation-induced erosion. No 
generally recognized erosion problems are associated 
with drip, sub-irrigated, or flood irrigation. Changes 
in irrigation erosion under climate change will occur 
as a function of the complex interactions between 
the increasingly greater stresses being placed on 
water resources, increased food demand, changes in 
rainfall, and the ability to adopt improved irrigation 
practices for greater water-use efficiency. Climatechange-
related stresses may lead to improvements 
in irrigation technology, including enhanced wateruse 
efficiency, which may work in concert with soil 
conservation gains, a case in point being the use of 
drip over furrow or sprinkler irrigation. 

Chapter 5 

The most direct effect 
of climate change on 
rainfall-driven erosion 
is related to rainfalls 
erosive power. 


Snow and Winter Processes 

For parts of the Northern United States, including 
4 million hectares of cropland in the northwestern 
wheat region, soil erosion is linked to snowfall 
amounts, snowmelt, and thawing soils (Van Klaveren 
and McCool 2010). Snow-associated erosion rates 
may be particularly high when snowmelt or rainfall 
occurs on thawed soil overlying a frozen layer of 
soil underneath (Zuzel et al. 1982; Schillinger 2001). 
Recently thawed soil is highly erodible because of 
the freezing effect on soil structure and aggregation, 
which increases soil erodibility, but equally or more 
importantly because of high moisture content and 
low soil water suction (Van Klaveren and McCool 
2010). Although some process-based and plot-scale 
research has taken place, there is a general lack of 
knowledge about the rates of soil erosion associated 
with snowmelt or rain-on-thawing-soil erosion on a 
regional or national basis. A potential effect of climate 
change is associated with a change from snowfall 
to rainfall. If decreased days of snowfall translate 
correspondingly to increased days of rainfall, erosion 
by storm runoff is likely to increase. The potential 
trends of snow-induced erosion and the effects of 
snow-melt on thawing soils have not been assessed. 

Wind 

Wind erosion rate is a function of the wind velocity, 
soil moisture content, soil surface roughness, soil 
structure, field length, and vegetation characteristics 
(Chepil and Woodruff 1954; Skidmore 1965; 
Skidmore et al. 1970; Ravi et al. 2011). The primary 
region of concern for wind erosion on U.S. croplands 
stretches across the Great Plains, from Texas north 
to Montana, North Dakota, and western Minnesota 
(USDA 2010). Additional areas of concern include 
the Northwestern United States (Washington and 
Idaho) and scattered areas of the Intermountain West. 
Areas of high wind erosion also occur on grazing 
lands in the arid and semi-arid regions of the Western 
United States. Munson et al. ( 2011) have suggested 
that wind erosion will increase on grazing lands of 
the Southwestern United States because of increased 
aridity and associated reductions of vegetation cover. 
Major changes of wind erosion rates driven by 
climate change would likely be associated with local 
or regional changes in vegetation and soil moisture, 
however there are no published studies available 
that estimate the potential increases in future wind 
speeds. 

Increased wind is also likely to increase wildfire 
incidence, which in turn will increase wind and water 
erosion rates due to the drastic reductions in ground 
cover associated with burns (Sankey et al. 2012). 
There have been declining trends in near-surface 
wind speed over the last several decades (Pryor et 
al. 2009), and model projections indicate that these 
trends of decreasing wind speed will continue in 
the future (Segal et al. 2001). This may lead to a 
decrease in evapotranspiration in cropping regions 
and also reduce the potential for wind erosion. 

Changing Agricultural Production and the 
Effects on Soil Erosion 

Agricultural producers, in response to climate 
change, will change the types of crops planted and 
crops management. Changes in production can have 
effects on soil erosion that may be greater than other 
effects of climate change. Exactly how such changes 
occur will be a complex function of changing 
precipitation and temperature regimes, atmospheric 
CO2 concentrations, economics, and plant genetics, 
among other factors. 

Southworth et al. (2002a,b) used global circulation 
model output (from the U.K. Hadley Centre 
HadCM2 model) with various crop models to evaluate 
potential changes in wheat, corn, and soybean 
production in Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, 
and Wisconsin by the mid-21st century. The studies 
projected significant changes in planting and harvest 
dates, which certainly have the potential to influence 
erosion rates. Those results were then coupled 
with economic modeling (Pfeifer and Habeck 2002; 
Pfeifer et al. 2002) to create scenarios of producer 
adaptation. Taking all of this information together, 
ONeal et al. (2005) conducted a study of climate 
change effects on projected runoff and soil erosion in 
the five States with changes in corn-soybean-wheat 
management, which included projected changes in 
the percentage of the three crops grown across the 
region, biomass production, planting dates, tillage 
dates, andharvest dates, as well as changes in temperature 
and precipitation patterns themselves. The 
results of the simulations projected runoff increases 
from 10% to 310% and soil loss increases from 33% 
to 274% from 2040-2059 relative to 1990-1999 
for 10 of the 11 sub-regions of the study area due 
to reduction in projected corn biomass (and hence 
reduced crop residue) production and a shift in crop 
percentages toward soybeans, which are much more 
erodible crops than either corn or wheat (Wischmeier 
and Smith 1978). These projections are uncertain, 
however they indicate the large potential magnitudes 
of erosion rate changes that could occur with changes 
in production. 

Chapter 5 

The primary region 
of concern for wind 
erosion on U.S. croplands 
stretches across the 
Great Plains, from Texas 
north to Montana, North 
Dakota, and western 
Minnesota. 


Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

Recent findings from open-top chamber and freeair 
research systems show that soil organic matter 
(SOM) turnover appears to accelerate under elevated 
CO2, and with adequate soil moisture and nutrients, 
plant productivity is consistently increased (Peralta 
and Wander 2008; Moran and Jastrow 2010; Cheng 
et al. 2011). This suggests that accelerated SOM 
turnover rates may have long-term implications for 
soils productivity and C storage potential. 

Adaptation 

Future changes in the climatic drivers of soil erosion 
and farmer management adaptations to a changing 
climate (e.g., crop selection and dates of planting, 
harvest, and tillage) have the potential to greatly 
influence soil erosion rates, with a general trend in 
the United States toward higher rates of erosion. 
Agricultural production systems will change under 
a changing climate, but if production systems are 
implemented congruently with appropriate conservation 
management systems as they inevitably shift 
in response to climate change, the effects of most 
increased precipitation amounts and intensities on 
soil erosion can be alleviated (Delgado et al. 2011; 
Lal et al. 2011). The additional benefit of conservation 
management is the contribution to climate 
change mitigation by sequestering atmospheric CO2 
through increased organic matter in the soil and by 
reducing emissions of nitrogen trace gases such as 
N2O through improved rate, timing, and method of 
fertilizer application (Delgado and Mosier 1996; 
Eagle et al. 2010; Lal et al. 2011). 

Conservation tillage, crop residue management, 
cover crops, and management of livestock grazing 
intensities have the potential to reduce much or all 
of the acceleration of soil erosion rates that might 
occur under a more intense rainfall regime associated 
with climate change (Delgado et al. 2011). In 
addition, these techniques in general enhance soil 
quality by increasing SOM content and improving 
soil structure (Karlen et al. 1994a, 1994b; Lal 1997; 
Reicosky 1997; Weltz et al. 2003; Weltz et al. 2011), 
both of which improve the water-holding capacity of 
soils and hence could be key to adaptation for water 
management during drought. 

A newer method in the conservation toolbox is the 
use of precision conservation, an approach that targets 
conservation practices to places on the landscape 
where they will be most effective. Precision conservation 
takes into account the temporal variability 
of weather events, the variability of surface flows, 
the variability of slope gradient and length, and the 
variability 
of soil and chemical properties of soil 
across the landscape (Berry et al. 2003; Mueller et al. 
2005; Schumacher et al. 2005; Pike et al. 2009; Luck 
et al. 2010; Tomer 2010). Precision conservation 
techniques may be particularly well adapted to application 
under the increased variability and rainfall 
intensities associated with climate change. Among 
the expected effects of climate change is greater 
frequency of extreme precipitation events. Since soil 
variability, variations in hydrology, and variability in 
surface terrain affect erosion rates, extreme precipitation 
events will accentuate variation in erosion rates 
across any given field, increasing the erosion rates at 
given locations across the field where surface flows 
will be spatially more concentrated. 

Agricultural Water Resources and 
Irrigation 

Changing climate conditions over the coming 
decades are likely to significantly affect water 
resources, with broad implications for the U.S. crop 
sector. Rising temperatures and shifting precipitation 
patterns will alter crop-water requirements, cropwater 
availability, crop productivity, and costs of 
water access, resulting in differential effects across 
the agricultural landscape. The resulting shift in crop 
regime competitiveness, in turn, will drive changes 
in cropland allocations and production systems. 
Regional production effects will depend on climateinduced 
changes to hydrologic systems and on the 
sensitivity of current cropping regimes to changes in 
water requirements and water availability. 

Dryland production (i.e., farming occurring in semiarid 
areas) may be particularly sensitive to shifting 
climatic conditions, as changes in growing season 
precipitation and soil water evaporation directly 
affect soil-moisture reserves essential for dryland 
crops. The effect of a warming climate on soilmoisture 
would vary regionally, depending on the 
net effect of higher evaporative losses and changes in 
precipitation. Increased precipitation variability may 
also have important implications for dryland production. 
An increase in field runoff due to heightened 
storm intensity would reduce the fraction of precipitation 
infiltrating into the crop root zone (SWCS, 
2003).3 Coupled with changes in precipitation will be 

Chapter 5 

Conservation 
tillage, crop residue 
management, cover 
crops, and management 
of livestock grazing 
intensities have the 
potential to reduce much 
or all of the acceleration 
of soil erosion rates that 
might occur under a 
more intense rainfall 
regime associated with 
climate change. 


3 This report did not examine potential increases in flood risk 
due to climate change, however increased crop losses and 
yield declines due to excessive water are significant concerns 
in low-lying areas that are subject to periodic flooding (DOI, 
2011). 


an increase in the atmospheric moisture demand due 
to the projected increases in temperature and higher 
saturated vapor pressure, which in turn will reduce 
the availability of water for crops (Hatfield et al. 
2001). Areas prone to warmer and drier conditions 
may see greater and more severe drought frequency, 
increasing variability in annual dryland yield. 

Under irrigated production, natural soil-moisture 
deficits may be replenished during the growing 
season through applied irrigation. In arid areas of the 
Western United States, where soil-moisture reserves 
are generally low and crop-water demands high, 
irrigation provides a significant share of crop-water 
requirements in most years. In more humid areas of 
the United States, irrigation supplements available 
soil-moisture reserves, particularly during periods of 
below-average rainfall. While irrigation reduces the 
risk from variable seasonal rainfall associated with 
dryland production, irrigators may be at greater risk 
from the cost and availability of purchased water 
supplies. 

Climate change effects on the intensification of the 
hydrologic cycle will have consequences for agricultural 
production and soil conservation across many 
U.S. regions. Common to most regions are projected 
increases in precipitation amounts, along with 
increased intensity and frequency of extreme events. 
Drought frequency and severity will increase, rainfree 
periods will lengthen, and individual precipitation 
events will become more erratic and intense, 
leading to more runoff. 

The U.S. Irrigated Sector Under a Changing 
Climate 

Climate change has important implications for the 
extent and distribution of future U.S. irrigated crop 
production. Irrigated lands in the United State are 
located in many different climatic regimes and utilize 
a range of water resources (e.g., groundwater and 
surface water). Regional adjustments in irrigated 
acreage will depend on changes to regional water 
balances under a warming climate and the resulting 
effects on the viability and competitiveness of irrigated 
production. In this report, we do not consider 
regional shifts in the proportion of acreage irrigated 
and briefly discuss three important determinants of 
acreage response to irrigation, including: (1) agricultural 
water requirements; (2) water-supply availability; 
and (3) relative returns to irrigated and dryland 
production. 

Agricultural Water Requirements 

Climate change can alter regional water requirements 
for crop production through two pathways: 
crop-level changes in water demand (i.e., biophysical 
responses) and land-use changes from producer 
adjustments in terms of which and how many crops 
to grow, as well as how best to grow them (i.e., adaptation 
responses). 

The potential interactions of a changing climate on 
crop-level water requirements are highly complex. 
As noted earlier, carbon enrichment in isolation 
increases crop water-use efficiency (i.e., yield per 
unit of evapotranspiration (ET) through both reduced 
transpiration and increased photosynthetic efficiency. 
That effect may be offset, however, by the rising 
temperatures associated with increased carbon concentrations, 
which increase plant transpiration and 
associated water loss. Furthermore, research suggests 
that the magnitude of the CO2-related reduction 
in ET may also be tied to temperature, where CO2 
enrichment effect declines as temperature increases 
(CCSP 2008). 

Potential changes in irrigation water demand will 
depend on how climate-induced adjustments in 
crop-water requirements compare with adjusted 
precipitation levels in that region. Where crop 
ET rises relative to the change in growing season 
precipitation, irrigation requirements for that crop 
will increase. However, an increase in growingseason 
precipitation above crop-water demand may 
reduce crop-level irrigation requirements, although 
soil-moisture levels would depend on the timing of 
rainfall. How changes in crop-level water demand 
aggregate up to regional changes in irrigation 
demand will depend on shifts in land use and crop 
allocations in response to climate change. 

Water-Supply Availability 

Nationally, 58% of irrigation water withdrawals are 
from surface water (Kenny et al. 2009). Climate 
change is likely to have an effect on surface-water 
resources, with temperature and precipitation shifts 
expected to alter the volume and timing of storm and 
snowmelt runoff to surface-water bodies (Nayak et 
al. 2010). Annual streamflow may increase in the 
Northern and Eastern United States, where annual 
precipitation is projected to increase, while precipitation 
declines for the Southern Mountain and 
Southern Plains regions will likely result in reduced 
streamflow and a shift of seasonal flow volumes to 
the wetter winter months in this irrigation-dominated 
area (DOI, 2011). 

Chapter 5 

In arid areas of the 
Western United States, 
where soil-moisture 
reserves are generally low 
and crop-water demands 
high, irrigation provides 
a significant share of 
crop-water requirements 
in most years. 


Snowpack is an especially important factor in the 
magnitude and timing of seasonal runoff and stored 
water reserves used for irrigated crop production. 
This trend is a particular concern in the West, where 
much of the surface-water runoff comes from mountain 
snowmelt. Higher temperatures will restrict the 
snow storage season, resulting in reduced snow accumulations 
and earlier spring meltoff (Knowles et al. 
2006; Nayak et al. 2010). Stored water reserves are 
projected to decline in many river basins, especially 
in critical summer growing months when crop-water 
demands are greatest (DOI, 2011). 

The effect of precipitation changes on surface-water 
flows may be offset or compounded by temperatureinduced 
shifts in potential ET (PET). Higher temperatures 
are projected to increase both evaporative 
losses from land and water surfaces and transpiration 
losses from non-crop land cover, potentially 
lessening annual runoff and streamflow for a given 
precipitation regime.4 

Ground water is a primary water source for irrigation 
in the Plains States and an important irrigation 
water supply for the Eastern United States, as well 
as areas of the Mountain and Pacific West regions, 
however, relatively less research attention has 
focused on climate effects on ground water systems. 
In the Southwest, one study focusing on Arizonas 
San Pedro Basin projected substantial decreases on 
ground water recharge based on multiple downscaled 
climate models and scenarios (Serrat-Capdevila et 
al. 2007). While ground water aquifers are generally 
less influenced in the short term by weather patterns, 
changing climate effects on precipitation, streamflow, 
and soil-water evaporation can affect ground water 
systems over time through effects on ground water 
recharge (Dettinger and Earman 2007). 

In arid areas of the Western United States, regional 
water supply changes will affect irrigated acreage 
response. Agriculture may become increasingly water 
constrained across the central and southern portions 
of the Mountain and Pacific West regions (DOI 
2011), where reduced mountain snowmelt will affect 
the stored surface-water reserves that provide much 
of the regions irrigation supply. Projected precipitation 
increases in the northern Rockies and Pacific 
Northwest, on the other hand, could experience 
improved surface-water supplies (DOI 2011). Heavy 
reliance on ground water from the Ogallala Aquifer 
may shield the Plain States irrigated sector from 
annual and seasonal water availability shifts. Ground 
water pumping at greater-than-natural recharge rates 
has caused a significant decline in water-table levels 
over much of the region, and the likely increase in 
water demands due to climate change may intensify 
pressures on ground water resources. Water supplies 
in the Southern Plains may be further constrained 
over the long term, while shifting precipitation patterns 
may increase soil moisture and surface-water 
availability in the Northern Plains (DOI 2011; Ojima 
et al. 1999). In the more humid Eastern United 
States, projected precipitation increases may sustain 
surface and ground water supplies across the Central 
and Northern regions. Potentially drier conditions 
in the Delta and Southeast regions, however, could 
tighten water supplies. Future irrigation expansion 
may depend on potential shifts in drought event 
frequency and severity. 

Returns to Crop Production 

Changing climate patterns may alter returns to 
irrigated and dryland production through differential 
adjustments in production costs and crop yields. 
Where precipitation is generally adequate to support 
dryland production in most years, a shift in relative 
returns may have more influence on irrigated acreage 
response than adjustments in regional water supplies. 

In general, production costs for irrigated crop 
enterprises are substantially higher than dryland 
production costs, reflecting both the additional costs 
of irrigation water access and distribution and the 
more intensive use of inputs in irrigated production. 
Where climate change results in increased watersupply 
scarcity, the cost of irrigation is likely to 
increase. Regional effects on irrigation returns will 
vary depending on climate interactions with surface 
and ground water systems and the cost of applied 
water in irrigated production. Energy cost adjustments 
attributable to climate change would also have 
a large effect on irrigation returns, reflecting the 
costs of water pumping and pressurization as well as 
increased energy needs associated with operations 
(e.g., harvesting) and inputs (e.g., petroleum-based 
nitrogen fertilizer) in irrigated production.5 

Chapter 5 

Where climate change 
results in increased 
water-supply scarcity, the 
cost of irrigation is likely 
to increase. 


4 Other factors, including precipitation, radiation, cloud cover, 
humidity, wind velocity, and atmospheric carbon, affect ET 
rates, and our understanding of how factors would interact 
under a changing climate is incomplete. 

5 Climate change could influence energy costs through 
adjustments in aggregate energy demand, changes in 
hydropower generation caused by altered flow regimes, and 
climate mitigation policies to reduce carbon emissions and 
expand renewable energy sources. 


Changes in relative crop returns may also reflect the 
sensitivity of dryland and irrigated yields to climatic 
factors. The projected change in dryland yields 
relative to a change in irrigated yields is an indicator 
of the relative competitiveness of irrigation under 
alternative climate scenarios and potential directional 
shifts in irrigated acreage. Dryland production may 
continue in Northern regions, for example, where 
projected precipitation increases may supplement 
soil-moisture reserves. In Southern regions facing a 
potential decline in growing season soil moisture, a 
relative decline in dryland yields would suggest the 
potential for irrigation expansion. Actual irrigated 
acreage response, however, will depend on the 
availability of regional water supplies to support 
irrigation. 

Farm-level adaptation to climate change can help 
mitigate potential costs to irrigated agriculture, 
particularly for areas of the U.S. West facing a 
potential contraction of irrigated acreage due to 
growing water scarcity (Adams and Peck 2008; 
Howitt et al. 2010). Cropland allocations are likely to 
favor higher valued or less water-intensive irrigated 
crops. Improved irrigation technologies can improve 
water conveyance and field application efficiency, 
enhancing productivity in the face of limited water 
supplies. Expanded ground water withdrawals 
may offset surface-water shortfalls in deficit years. 
Changes in water resource infrastructure and 
institutions may facilitate the optimal allocation of 
limited water supplies under a warming climate. 
Potential infrastructure improvements include 
improved water-supply forecasting, more efficient 
water-storage and delivery operations, expanded 
use of water market transfers, and water-supply 
enhancement through reservoir storage, aquifer 
storage and recovery, and wastewater reuse. 

Adaptation 

Adoption and implementation of soil conservation 
practices by producers and land managers depend 
on attitudes about and participation in the stewardship 
of soil and water resources. Todays agricultural 
economy often forces farmers to make decisions that 
may be necessary for survival of their business, but 
are less protective of soil and water resources. Additionally, 
a substantial fraction of croplands are now 
leased on short-term contracts, such that operators 
lack incentives for investments in soil conservation. 
Increasing technical assistance, financial incentives, 
education, and awareness of the effects of climate 
change may encourage more farmers to adopt soilconserving 
behaviors that mitigate the effects of 
intensified climate regime on soil erosion. Examples 
of soil conservation programs that could be refined 
to promote additional adaptive actions to climate 
change effects include: 

 The Environmental Quality Incentives Program 
(EQIP), a cost-sharing assistance program aimed 
at promoting production and environmental 
quality; 

 The Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), which 
consists of annual rental payments and cost-share 
assistance to establish long-term, resource-conserving 
ground covers; 

 The Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP), 
which rewards producers for practices and 
systems that protect the environment and natural 
resources; and 

 Conservation Innovation Grants (CIG) to stimulate 
the development and adoption of innovative 
conservation approaches and technologies. 

Ecosystem Services 

Agricultural systems offer a range of potential ecosystem 
services, including pollination, biological pest 
control, nutrient cycling, hydrological cycling, greenhouse 
gas and carbon sequestration, and biodiversity. 
More than simply providing services, agricultural 
systems also utilize the available ecosystem services 
and processes for their function, which increases 
system complexity. Hatfield (2006) showed the need 
to examine agriculture from the viewpoint of multifunctionality 
of outcomes rather than a singular focus 
on productivity of feed, forage, fruit, or fiber. Power 
(2010) states that agricultural ecosystems provide 
humans more than just food, forage, bioenergy, and 
pharmaceuticals, these ecosystems are also essential 
to human well-being. In addition to the landscape, 
the range of agroecosystem goods and services is 
also expressed at the watershed and airshed (similar 
to a watershed, an airshed encapsulates the ways in 
which air flows across the landscape) scales. Expressions 
of ecosystem health at atmosphere and water 
endpoints can be represented by water quality, air 
quality, biodiversity, and recreation. 

While the benefit of agroecosystem services is clear, 
the biological effect and interactions with social 
values are not easily expressed in monetary terms 
(Heal 2000). Further, lacking direct studies that relate 
environmental goods and services to climate change 
scenarios, assessment of the effects of climate change 
is not currently possible. Fischlin et al. (2007) 

Chapter 5 

Farm-level adaptation to 
climate change can help 
mitigate potential costs 
to irrigated agriculture, 
particularly for areas of 
the U.S. West facing a 
potential contraction of 
irrigated acreage due to 
growing water scarcity. 


provide an overview of agroecosystem goods and 
services and potential linkages to climate change, 
concluding that the ability of ecosystems to function 
within the bounds of their ability to adapt will 
be exceeded by the combination of climate change 
coupled with disturbances in the ecosystem (e.g., 
flooding, droughts, insects, and changes in land use). 
The linkage of agricultural systems within the ecosystem 
context under the pressure of climate change 
will require increased emphasis on quantifying the 
role of agriculture as a component of the ecosystem 
and the feedbacks among the components. 

Potential increases in soil erosion occurring with 
increases in rainfall intensity show that runoff and 
sediment movement from agricultural landscapes 
will likewise increase (Nearing 2001). Changes in 
precipitation event intensity are already occurring 
and are expected to continue to increase throughout 
the remainder of this century (Kunkel et al. 
1999). Increases in surface runoff lead to potential 
increases in sediment transport of herbicides and 
phosphorus from the surface. Shipitalo and Owens 
(2006) showed that extreme events were responsible 
for a large amount of the herbicide loss from fields. 
Extreme events will play a large role in affecting 
the linkage between agricultural systems and offsite 
effects caused by the potential effect of increased 
precipitation. 

Pollinators 

Ecosystem services reliant on biological interactions 
may be particularly vulnerable to climate change if 
the interacting species respond differently to environmental 
change (Tylianakis et al. 2008; Hegland et 
al. 2009). Crop pollination is an important biologically 
mediated service, because 75% of the leading 
global food crops are pollinated by animals (Klein 
et al. 2007). The phenology of many ecological 
processes is modulated by temperature, making them 
potentially sensitive to climate change. Mutualistic 
interactions such as pollination may be especially 
vulnerable due to the potential for phenological 
mismatching (i.e., asynchrony in its activity period) 
if different taxa do not respond similarly to temperature 
changes (Root et al. 2003). In particular, if 
pollinators and flowering plants respond differently 
to warming temperatures, this could result in phenological 
mismatches with negative outcomes for both 
groups of organisms. 

An analysis was conducted on climate-associated 
shifts in the phenology of wild bees, the most 
important pollinators worldwide, and compared to 
published studies of bee-pollinated plants over the 
same time period (Bartomeus et al. 2011). Over 
the past 130 years, the adult activity period of 10 
bee species from northeastern North America has 
advanced by a mean of 10.4 1.3 days. Most of 
this advance has taken place since 1970, paralleling 
global temperature increases. When compared to the 
shifts in plant phenology over this time period, the 
changes in phenological rates are not distinguishable 
from those of bees, suggesting that bee emergence is 
keeping pace with shifts in host-plant flowering, at 
least among the generalist species investigated in this 
study. However, the case could be different for bees 
that specialize on particular plants, and plants that 
specialize on particular bees; such taxa have not yet 
been investigated. 

In addition to shifts in bee phenology, climate 
change may also affect the daily activity patterns of 
bees. Potential future effects of climate warming on 
crop pollination services were evaluated utilizing 
data from 18 watermelon farms in New Jersey and 
Pennsylvania between 2005 and 2010 (Rader 2012, 
personal communication). To assess this interaction, 
pollen deposition and daily activity patterns of seven 
dominant pollinator taxa were evaluated as a function 
of temperature and time of day. Future plantpollinator 
interactions were then simulated based 
on two Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) climate change scenarios (one assuming low 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the other assuming 
high emissions) at two future time periods (2050 and 
2100) to determine the effect of rising temperatures 
on pollinator activity patterns and subsequently on 
crop pollination services. Under current conditions, 
pollinators differ in their activity patterns at varying 
temperatures within a day. Model predictions suggest 
that under future, warmer climate scenarios, five of 
the seven taxa should provide increased pollination 
services. Conversely, the honeybee, which is the 
dominant crop pollinator worldwide, and one native 
bee species, are predicted to provide less pollination 
under projected future warmer conditions. The differential 
responses among bee species to rising temperatures 
should help stabilize pollination services, 
as the decline in services by some taxa is buffered 
by the increase in others. It is important to note that 
native pollinator species provide this buffering effect 
and that the study system where the work was done 
has high levels of crop pollination (about 60%) from 
native bees. In other, more intensive agricultural systems 
where native bees are absent, the honey bee is 
the primary crop pollinator. The results of this study 
suggest that in such systems, pollination will decline 
as the climate warms. 

Chapter 5 

Changes in precipitation 
event intensity are 
already occurring and are 
expected to continue to 
increase throughout the 
remainder of this century. 


Adaptation 

Ecosystem services represent the interaction among 
agricultural systems across the landscape scale 
and are interlinked with time. Effective adaptation 
strategies will have to account for these interactions, 
modifying the various components of the agricultural 
system to change their response to climate stressors 
so as to ensure the multifunctionality of the various 
endpoints. As an example, development of habitat 
conducive to the survival of pollinators would provide 
an adaptation strategy for this system that would 
allow it to better cope with climate change. 

U.S. Agricultural Production 

The effects of climate change on plants and 
livestock are critical to the future of efficient and 
profitable agricultural production. Changes in 
CO2, temperature, precipitation, and evaporative 
demand directly influence plants and animals. 
Production systems will also be altered through the 
effects of climate change on insects, weeds, and 
diseases. The direct effects of climate change have 
similarities, such as rising temperatures causing 
rapid development, increased water use, and altered 
productivity. The end results are different, however, 
because each crop and livestock type has specific 
thresholds (see Table 5.1 for examples) in response 
to each of these variables. These specific responses 
will determine the efficacy of adaptation practices 
and the potential change of plant or livestock 
distribution as climate change occurs. The following 
sections will detail responses of select production 
systems to climate variables. 

Corn and Soybean 

During 2011, 91.9 million acres of corn and 75.0 
million acres of soybean were planted in the United 
States (www.nass.usda.gov). These two crops are 
often grown in rotation, with the major production 
region of both crops concentrated in the Midwest. 
Iowa and Illinois account for approximately onethird 
of the U.S. corn crop, and more than 80% 
of soybean acreage is concentrated in the upper 
Midwest. According to the USDA Economic 
Research Service, corn grain typically accounts for 
more than 10% of U.S. agricultural exports, and the 
value of soybean oilseed exports currently exceeds 
$20 billion.6 Thus, understanding the implications of 
global environmental change on current and future 
corn and soybean production has profound economic 
implications for the United States and the world. 

Temperature Effects 

For both corn and soybean, effects of rising temperature 
depend upon current mean temperatures 

Chapter 5 


6 For more information, see http://www.ers.usda.gov. 

Table 5.1. Cardinal base and optimum temperatures (C) for vegetative development and reproductive development, optimum 
temperature for vegetative biomass, optimum temperature for maximum grain yield, and failure (ceiling) temperature 
at which grain yield fails to zero yield, for economically important crops. The optimum temperatures for vegetative production, 
reproductive (grain) yield, and failure point temperatures represent mean temperatures from studies where diurnal 
temperature range was up to 10C. 

Crop 
Base 
Temp Veg 
Opt 
Temp Veg 
Base 
Temp 
Repro 
Opt 
Temp 
Repro 
Opt Temp 
Range 
Veg Prod 
Opt Temp 
Range 
Reprod Yield 
Failure 
Temp 
Reprod Yield 
Corn 81 341 81 341 18-222 353 
Sorghum 816 3416 816 3117 26-3418 2517,19 3517 
Bean 2328 23-2428,29 3228 
Cotton 1420 3720 1420 28-3020 3421 25-2622 3523 
Peanut 1024 
Rice 812 3613 812 3312 3314 23-2613,15 35-3613 
Soybean 74 304 65 265 25-376 22-246 397 
Wheat 08 268 18 268 20-309 1510 3411 
Sources: 1Kiniry and Bonhomme (1991), Badu-Apraku et al. (1983); 2Muchow et al. (1990); 3Herrero and Johnson (1980); 4Hesketh 
et al. (1973); 5Boote et al. (1998); 6Boote et al. (1997); 7Boote et al. (2005); 8Hodges and Ritchie (1991); 9Kobza and Edwards (1987); 
10Chowdury and Wardlaw (1978); 11Tashiro and Wardlaw (1990); 12Alocilja and Ritchie (1991); 13Baker et al. (1995); 14Matsushima et al. 
(1964); 15Horie et al. (2000); 16Alagarswamy and Ritchie (1991); 17Prasad et al. (2006a); 18Maiti (1996); 19Downs (1972); 20K. R. Reddy et 
al. (1999, 2005); 21V. R. Reddy et al. (1995); 22K. R. Reddy et al. (2005); 23K. R. Reddy et al. (1992a, 1992b); 24Ong (1986); 25Bolhuis and 
deGroot (1959); 26Prasad et al. (2003); 27Williams et al. (1975); 28Prasad et al. (2002); 29Laing et al. (1984). 
during critical reproductive growth phases (Table 
5.1 contains cardinal and optimal temperatures for 
growth and yield). A rise in temperature of 0.8 C 
over the next 30 years in the Corn Belt is estimated 
to decrease corn yields by 2% to 3%, assuming 
no interacting effects from soil moisture deficits 
(Hatfield et al. 2011). This trend is largely based on 
observations of geographic variation in maximum 
corn yields, so is likely an underestimate because it 
does not consider the interaction of temperature and 
water availability, nor does it incorporate potential 
effects of increasing temperature on photosynthesis, 
respiration, or reproductive parameters (Hatfield et 
al. 2011). 

Lobell and Field (2007) estimate an 8.3% decrease in 
corn yield per each 1C increase in average growing 
season temperature. For soybean, the mean growingseason 
temperature in the upper Midwest is approximately 
22.5C, so a 0.8C increase in temperature 
may increase yields (Hatfield et al. 2011), but this 
conclusion is not supported by recent historical 
analysis (e.g., Hatfield et al. 2011). For the Southern 
United States, growing-season temperatures are 
higher, such that midcentury warming of 0.8C is 
estimated to decrease yields by approximately 2.4% 
(Hatfield et al. 2011). This estimate is greater than 
the projected value based on extrapolating the global 
historical temperature/yield relationship, which 
predicts approximately a 1.3% decrease in soybean 
yield per 1C increase in temperature (Lobell and 
Field 2007). One limitation of using historical relationships 
to project future crop performance is that 
such relationships cannot account for steady genetic 
improvements in yield potential over time. 

Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

The physiological basis for corn and soybean 
response to rising CO2 is fundamentally different 
(Leakey et al. 2009a). As a C4 plant, corn photosynthesis 
is saturated at current levels of CO2, so 
increasing concentrations of CO2 over this century 
are unlikely to stimulate photosynthetic gain, except 
during times of drought (Leakey 2009). Conversely, 
soybean is a C3 plant, and increasing atmospheric 
CO2 increases intercellular CO2 concentrations, 
which leads to an increased rate of photosynthesis 
and a lower respiration rate, resulting in a net 
increase of photosynthesis and growth (Bernacchi et 
al. 2006). 

Across three growing seasons and two contrasting 
nitrogen (N) treatments, corn yield was not 
significantly increased by growth at elevated CO2 
(Leakey et al. 2004; Leakey et al. 2006; Markelz 
et al. 2011). However, soybean yields were significantly 
increased by growth at elevated CO2 (550 
to 585 ppm), averaging 15-16% higher in different 
years of the experiment (Morgan 2005). Some key 
mechanistic responses of these crops to elevated CO2 
have been learned from the SoyFACE experiment 
(Leakey et al. 2009a). First, there is the potential for 
elevated CO2 to indirectly enhance C4 photosynthesis, 
growth, and yield by delaying and ameliorating 
drought stress (Leakey 2009a). Elevated CO2 reduces 
stomatal conductance in both C3 and C4 species 
and has the potential to reduce soil-water use rates, 
leading to improved use of soil moisture (Leakey et 
al. 2006). Second, in addition to increased photosynthetic 
rates, soybeans have increased respiration 
rates at elevated CO2 (Leakey et al. 2009a). From a 
productivity standpoint, increased respiration likely 
supports enhanced products from photosynthesis 
ranging from leaves to sink tissues, driving increased 
plant growth and seed yield at elevated CO2 (Ainsworth 
et al. 2006; Leakey et al. 2009b). Third, the 
degree of stimulation of soybean growth by elevated 
CO2 depends upon other environmental conditions, 
namely temperature and soil-moisture status (Bernacchi 
et al. 2006). 

Adaptation 

Over the past 30 years, both corn and soybean have 
been planted increasingly earlier in the spring (Sacks 
and Kucharik 2011). Across the United States, 
corn planting dates have advanced by 10 days and 
soybean by 12 days from 1981 to 2005. This earlier 
planting has been accompanied by a longer growing 
season, especially for corn. Trends in early planting 
coupled with the shift to longer season cultivars have 
together contributed to the yield increase observed 
over the past three decades (Bruns and Abbas 2006; 
Kucharik 2006; Sacks and Kucharik 2011). Simulations 
of corn yield potential predicted a 2-Megagramper-
hectare (Mg ha-1) increase for a 7-day longer 
maturity (119-day versus a 112-day) hybrid (Yang 
et al. 2006). However, the trend in earlier planting is 
not necessarily related to wide-ranging springtime 
warming, which only occurred over a small portion 
of the U.S. Midwest from 1981 to 2005, but rather 
to the development of genotypes tolerant of suboptimal 
early season temperatures, planting equipment 
improvements, and adoption of conservation tillage 
(Kucharik 2006). Reduced tillage practices and 
advanced equipment capable of completing several 
tasks in one pass lessen the time and resources 
needed to prepare soils for spring planting (Kucharik 
2006). 

Recent analyses of historical yield data and growingseason 
temperatures indicate a negative relationship, 
meaning that yields of both corn and soybean are 
depressed during warmer years (Lobell and Field 
2007; Kucharik and Serbin 2008). A trend toward 

Chapter 5 


cooler U.S. growing-season temperatures predominated 
from 1980 to 2008, which likely contributed to 
yield gains of both corn and soybean over that period 
(Lobell and Asner 2003). Globally, the United States 
appears to be an anomaly, as many other countries 
world-wide have shown a clear warming trend during 
the growing season (Lobell et al. 2011). Therefore, 
although recent climate trends have had only a small 
effect on corn and soybean yields in the United 
States, climate trends have reduced corn yields over 
the past 30 years (Lobell et al. 2011). 

Another favorable trend over the past 90 years is that 
crop-growing seasons have become wetter in parts 
of the Midwest (Illinois and Indiana), and droughts 
have become more localized over that same time 
(Mishra and Cherkauer 2010). From 1980 to 2007, 
soybean and corn yields were well correlated to 
meteorological drought during grain filling periods 
and to daily maximum air temperature (Mishra 
and Cherkauer 2010). Thus, it is likely that some 
of the negative effect of warming on yields has 
been counter-balanced by increases in precipitation 
(Kucharik and Serbin 2008). A limitation of these 
historical relationships is that even within relatively 
small regions, such as the State of Wisconsin, there 
is significant spatial variability of climate trends 
(Kucharik and Serbin 2008). Additionally, it is often 
difficult to separate the effects of increasing temperature 
from effects of moisture stress, as the two are 
intrinsically linked. 

The changes in climate over the past century have 
been driven by changes in the atmosphere, notably 
an increase in atmospheric CO2 and a variable concentration 
of tropospheric ozone (Chapter 3). Over 
the past 50 years, atmospheric CO2 has increased by 
~73 ppm, which is estimated to have increased corn 
yields by 9% and soybean yields by 15% in dry years 
(McGrath and Lobell 2011). Other estimates of the 
CO2 fertilization effect over the past 50 years in both 
wet and dry years range from 0-13% for corn and 
3% to 17% for soybean (reviewed by McGrath and 
Lobell 2011). 

Adapting Corn and Soybean Production to Future 
Growing Conditions 

Understanding the interactions of direct and indirect 
climate change effects on corn and soybean production 
in the United States is a challenge. Regional 
projections for future temperature and drought stress 
vary, as do incidences of weeds, pests, and pathogens 
(Luck et al. 2011). How these stresses combine to 
affect productivity can be complex; for example, 
elevated CO2 alone or in combination with elevated 
ozone significantly reduced downy mildew disease 
severity by 39% to 66% in Midwestern soybean, but 
the same conditions also increased brown spot severity 
(Eastburn et al. 2010). Hatfield et al. (2011) predicted 
that with adequate water, corn in the Midwest 
would see a net yield response of -1.5% in 30 years 
due to temperature changes alone. However, corn 
production in the South would be more negatively 
affected by future climate because corn is closer to 
its optimal temperature in that region, and temperature 
increases would be expected to reduce yields 
more profoundly (Hatfield et al. 2011). Midwestern 
soybean was projected to show an increase in seed 
yield of 9.1% with the climate projected for 30 years 
from now; however, this again assumes sufficient 
water availability (Hatfield et al. 2011). In the South, 
soybean yields are projected to decrease as the negative 
effects of higher temperature will outweigh the 
benefits of rising CO2 (Hatfield et al. 2011). A major 
limitation of these projections is a paucity of experimental 
data to validate the conclusions. 

Rice 

Rice is widely acknowledged as a significant source 
of food for roughly 2 billion people, principally in 
Asia. U.S. rice production, centered in the Mississippi 
Delta region, currently occupies approximately 
3 million acres, with the United States being the 
worlds fourth largest rice exporter (Livezey et al. 
2004). At present, it is estimated that to keep pace 
with projected population increases, rice production 
must increase globally by approximately 1% 
annually (Rosegrant et al. 1995). Although dramatic 
yield increases were observed after the successful 
introduction of short-statured (semi-dwarf) rice 
varieties in the 1980s, recent trends indicate that U.S. 
rice yields have, in fact, stabilized (Figure 5.1). The 
gap between current rice production levels and future 
needs represents a growing challenge for agronomists 
and plant breeders. 

Chapter 5 

U.S. rice production, 
centered in the Mississippi 
Delta region, currently 
occupies approximately 
3 million acres, with the 
United States being the 
worlds fourth largest 
rice exporter. 


Fig. 5.1. Recent trends in rice productivity in the United States since 
1997. Source: www.nass.usda.gov. 


Clearly, in addressing this challenge, the climate 
change context will also have to be considered. Specifically, 
how rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations, 
changing temperature, and water availability might 
alter future rice production. Accurate projections 
regarding the effect of such changes are essential in 
determining not only rice production but, because 
of the importance of rice as a basic caloric source, 
global food security. Overall, the challenge for rice 
production in the United States is twofold: increasing 
production, while facing a suite of direct and indirect 
stressors associated with climate change. 

Temperature Effects 

Temperatures below 20C or above 35C at flowering 
generally result in increases of floral or spikelet 
sterility (Satake and Hayase 1970; Satake and 
Yoshida 1976; Satake 1995) due to lack of anther 
dehiscence (i.e., failure of pollen to form normally 
and be released). Reproductive processes, which 
occur within 1 to 3 hours after anthesis (i.e., dehiscence 
of the anther, shedding of pollen, germination 
of pollen grains on stigma, and elongation of pollen 
tubes), are disrupted by daytime air temperatures 
exceeding 33C (Satake and Yoshida 1976). Since 
anthesis occurs in most rice cultivars between about 
9 and 11 a.m., exceeding such air temperatures may 
become more prevalent in the future and affect rice 
grain yields. Cultivars that shed their pollen earlier in 
the day would avoid exposure to high temperature. 

Tian et al. (2010) observed in rice that a combination 
of high temperatures (>35C), coupled with high 
humidity and low wind speed, caused the panicle 
temperatures to be as much as 4C higher than air 
temperature, creating a situation inducing floret sterility. 
Some rice-growing regions could compensate 
for these losses; a warmer environment could support 
northward expansion of growing regions for japonica 
varieties. With yield currently limited by cold temperatures, 
warmer temperatures have the potential to 
generate greater yields in these areas. The majority of 
global rice production, however, is located in tropical 
and semi-tropical regions that would be negatively 
affected by higher projected temperatures, which will 
increase sterility and decrease yields in these areas 
(Prasad et al. 2006). Emerging evidence has shown 
that there are differences among rice cultivars for 
flowering time during the day (Sheehy et al. 2005). 
Shah et al. (2011) find that flowering at cooler times 
of the day would be beneficial to rice grown in 
warm environments and might become a phenotypic 
marker for high-temperature tolerance. 

Additionally, increases in nighttime temperature 
minimums have been shown to reduce rice yields 
through increased plant respiration (Mohammed and 
Tarpley 2009). Initial investigations in outdoor, sunlit 
chambers indicated that higher nighttime relative 
to daytime temperatures could reduce seed set and 
grain yield (Ziska and Manalo 1996). Long-term 
trends in minimum temperature suggest that such an 
effect may already be occurring in situ for production 
areas in China (Peng et al. 2004) and that increasing 
nighttime temperatures may be strongly associated 
with declining rice yields and rice quality (Welch 
et al. 2010). Reduced grain size and increased grain 
chalkiness have been associated with high nighttime 
temperatures; this results in lower grain-milling 
yields and reduced crop value (Cooper et al. 2008). 

Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

Rice, like most crop species with the C3 photosynthetic 
pathway, has been shown in a number of 
studies to respond to increasing levels of atmospheric 
CO2 (e.g., Baker et al. 1992). However, a number 
of contrasting spatial and temporal changes in rice 
development and yield variations in response to 
rising CO2 levels have also been reported (Kim et 
al. 1996; Moya et al. 1998; Kim et al. 2003). Of 
particular importance may be additional information 
regarding intra-specific variation among rice cultivars 
as well as quantification of the yield response 
to increasing CO2 in conjunction with other environmental 
factors likely to change (e.g., temperature) 
(Ziska and Bunce 2007). 

Changing Water Availability 

Although rice is grown in a number of different 
geographic environments, irrigated, or paddy, rice 
accounts for the majority of global production, 
including that occurring in the United States. Without 
adequate access to water, rice yields decline to less 
than one-third of that of irrigated production. Additionally, 
in hot dry areas (e.g., California), irrigation 
is needed to maintain sufficient evaporative cooling 
to avoid floral sterility. 

Although the total area planted in rice is roughly 
equivalent between irrigated and non-irrigated 
fields, irrigated rice accounts for 75% of the total 
rice production (Bouman et al. 2007). Much of the 
surface runoff used in irrigation is derived from snow 
and ice melt from mountain sources. These sources 
may be particularly vulnerable to warmer and drier 
conditions (IPCC 2007b; Immerzeel et al. 2010). 
Ground water supplies from aquifers are also likely 
to be affected in arid regions, due in part to declining 
water tables (overdrafts) and increasing pumping 
costs. In the United States, more than 80% of the rice 
crop is grown in the Mississippi River alluvial plain. 
The most intense rice production occurs in the Grand 
Prairie region of the Mississippi River Delta, where 
irrigation water is primarily derived from the alluvial 

Chapter 5 


aquifer (ASWCC 1997). However, the alluvial aquifer 
is not expected to sustain current extraction rates 
beyond 2015 due to ground water overdraft (Scott et 
al. 1998; U.S. Corps of Army Engineers 2000). 

Increased pumping costs and declining water levels 
in the alluvial aquifer have caused some farmers 
to install irrigation wells in the Sparta-Memphis 
aquifer that underlies the alluvial aquifer. Currently, 
about 30 new agricultural irrigation wells 
per year are being drilled into this aquifer (Charlier 
2002). This is of concern since the Sparta-Memphis 
aquifer is the source of drinking water for more than 
350,000 people, and it has much less capacity to 
sustain heavy agricultural pumping rates (ASWCC 
1997). Thus, one of the consequences of intense rice 
production using current, water-intensive production 
practices is the potential for ground water depletion 
and reduced agricultural sustainability over the long 
term. In fact, four Arkansas counties, accounting 
for 120,000 hectares of rice production, have been 
declared critical ground water areas by the Arkansas 
Natural Resource Commission and may be in jeopardy 
of losing access to water needed for irrigation 
(Young and Sweeney 2007). 

Evaluation of the other moisture extreme, flooding, 
should also be considered in the context of global 
climate change and rice productivity. While rice is 
tolerant of short-term water immersions, it is equally 
vulnerable to extended (more than 48 hours) submergence. 
Although major losses in rice crops are 
frequently reported in tropical regions of the world 
due to flooding, some 25,000 hectares of planted rice 
were lost due to flooding of the Mississippi River 
during 2011. 

Lastly, water quality in the context of rising sea level 
is critical. Thailand and Vietnam currently supply 
the bulk of rice exports. However, the World Bank 
estimates that even a 1-meter rise in sea level would 
increase the salinity of key river deltas sufficiently 
to reduce rice yields in both countries by up to 50% 
(World Bank 2000). Some 80,000 hectares of U.S. 
rice production are located along the Gulf Coast. 
Subsidence has been observed in these coastal 
marshlands for decades and has resulted in salt-water 
intrusion that affects rice production in this region. 
Storm surges associated with hurricanes Katrina 
and Rita in 2005 increased salinity in the soil and 
irrigation water, putting 10% of this area out of rice 
production for some years. The potential for similar 
effects throughout the Mississippi Delta region needs 
investigation. 

Extreme Weather Events 

Because of mechanization, large areas of rice and 
other cereals are grown in genetically uniform, 
mono-cropping systems. Such systems are capable 
of producing large quantities of grain  if weather 
is stable. However, because the number of extreme 
climatic events is likely to increase in the future, the 
lack of genetic diversity in such cropping systems 
makes them biologically more vulnerable to such 
occurrences (Roberts 2008). 

Insects and Diseases 

There is a dearth of assessments regarding the vulnerability 
of rice production to climate change and 
pest biology. This may be due, in part, to distinguishing 
between pest management and climate. For 
example, overreliance on pesticide applications, the 
subsequent selection of pesticide-resistant insects, 
weeds, and diseases, resulting in increased pest pressure 
may be of more concern than would be the case 
under gradual climate changes (Heong et al. 1995). 
Global warming will certainly affect insect fecundity, 
by changing synchronization of growth stages 
and growth requirements between pest and host; for 
example, a plants leaves must be at a certain stage 
of growth to provide certain insects a place to lay 
eggs. In addition, changes in geographic distribution 
of rice insect pests are likely to occur (Huang and 
Khanna 2010). Unlike other tropical regions of the 
world, insect pests in U.S. rice production fields have 
been limited due to winter-time survival. However, 
over the last 30 years the Mexican stem borer, which 
attacks sugarcane, rice, and other crops, has become 
a serious pest and has advanced from the southern tip 
of Texas to the Louisiana border, causing yield losses 
of up to 50%. 

For rice, it is generally known that water shortages, 
irregular rainfall patterns, and related water stresses 
can increase the intensity of some diseases, including 
brown spot and blast. Kobayashi et al. (2006) 
demonstrated that rising CO2 may affect disease 
directly by lowering leaf silicon content, which may 
have contributed to increased susceptibility to leaf 
blast. Assessments of rice disease under concurrent 
conditions of elevated CO2 and other climatic variables 
such as temperature and water are currently not 
available. 

Weeds 

Weeds impose the largest single limitation on crop 
yields (Oerke 2006). An overview of crop and weed 
competitive studies indicate that weeds could limit 
crop yields to a greater extent with rising levels of 
CO2 (Ziska 2010). To date, there have been a limited 
number of studies on the influence of weeds in rice 

Chapter 5 


Weeds impose the 
largest single limitation 
on crop yields. 


systems in the context of CO2 and/or climate change. 
Alberto et al. (1996) evaluated competitive changes 
between rice and a C4 weed (Echinochloa glabrescens
) at concurrent changes in CO2 and temperature 
to demonstrate that while increasing CO2 favored rice 
over the C4 weed, the combined changes in temperature 
and CO2 favored the weed species. Zhu et al. 
(2008) also showed that rice was favored over a C4 
grass (Echinochloa crus-galli) with elevated CO2, but 
only if the N supply was adequate. If N was limited, 
elevated CO2 led to a decline in rice relative to the 
grass. Data from this experiment, as with that of 
Alberto et al. (1996), indicate that crop-weed competition 
in response to CO2 increases may be contingent 
on other soil-related (edaphic) and physical parameters. 
Research conducted to compare the response 
of a widely grown southern U.S. rice cultivar with 
red rice, a common weed in rice production fields, at 
recent and projected increases of atmospheric CO2 
(300, 400 and 500 ppm, respectively) demonstrated 
that the weedy red rice produced a more dramatic 
increase in seed yield and biomass with rising CO2 
compared to the commercial cultivar (Ziska et al. 
2010). Overall, while additional data are needed, the 
information to date indicates that weed infestation 
and rice-weed competition may impose a greater 
limitation on rice production in the context of a 
changing climate (Ziska et al. 2010). 

Adaptation 

Little research is underway in the United States to 
address rice production vulnerabilities to climate 
change and/or opportunities associated with rising 
CO2 levels. Nevertheless, a number of potential 
adaptation strategies can be employed to maintain 
rice productivity. 

Cultivar Selection 

To promote adaptation to high temperature, plant 
breeders have suggested phenotypic traits including 
heat tolerance during flowering, high harvest 
index, small leaves, and reduced leaf area per unit 
of ground area as adaptive strategies that reduce 
canopy temperatures. Shifting peak flowering times 
to cooler periods may also be beneficial (Prasad et al. 
2006). Selection of traits related to extremes of water 
availability (drought and flooding) is underway by 
the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) and 
elsewhere (Wassmann et al. 2009). 

One additional means of adaptation to global climate 
change may lie in recognizing that CO2, the principal 
anthropogenic gas, also provides the raw material 
(carbon) needed for photosynthesis and growth. 
Because 95% of all plants currently lack optimal 
levels of CO2 for photosynthesis (i.e., those with the 
C3 photosynthetic pathway), this anthropogenically 
driven increase in CO2 represents a rapid rise in an 
available plant resource. Differential responses to 
such a changing resource, in turn, could provide 
a basis for human selection within crop lines 
for improved yields. Hence, selecting for CO2 
responsiveness among rice lines may provide an 
opportunity by which breeders and agronomists 
could adapt to climate change while maintaining 
both food security and economic stability (Ziska and 
McClung 2008). 

Agronomic Practices 

Production site adaptation for rice can include 
shifting planting dates, choosing cultivars with 
different growth duration, changing crop rotations, 
and utilizing different soil treatment applications 
(e.g., till vs. no-till). Adjustment of planting dates 
could be used to avoid temperature-induced spikelet 
sterility, provided that such shifts do not interfere 
with crop rotation or double-cropping practices. Such 
adjustments would be aided by improved climate 
forecasting (Gadgil et al. 2002). 

It is clear that among climate drivers in the Southern 
United States, reductions in water availability will 
require new management methods to reduce water 
use in rice production. Such methodologies must 
be economically viable and account for resource 
savings without significant loss in grain yield. 
New management techniques like intermittent 
irrigation appear particularly promising, with a 50% 
reduction in water application and no concomitant 
loss of production (Massey et al. 2003). Further 
water savings may be possible with other irrigation 
practices, but quantification of water use and yields 
are not available. 

Improved Pest Management 

An obvious need exists to assess the vulnerability 
of rice to climate and CO2-driven changes to pest 
biology. Vulnerability can be defined as the measure 
of the potential effects of a given change, minus the 
adaptive capacity to respond to that change within 
the system being affected (Sutherst et al. 2007). 
Potentially, innovations such as simulation modeling 
can be used to assess regional variability of rice 
and other cereals to demographic changes of pest 
distribution with projected climate. Some potential 
adaptation strategies would include development of 
pest-resistant cultivars; breeding with wild, related 
species of rice to select for genes and/or phenotypes 
that may be well suited to changing climate/CO2; 
greater reliance on integrated pest management; and 
a greater understanding of how climate is likely to 
change pest management. 

Chapter 5 

 crop-weed 
competition in response 
to CO2 increases may 
be contingent on other 
soil-related (edaphic) and 
physical parameters. 


Wheat 

Occupying 54.9 million acres of U.S. farmland 
in 2011, total wheat production amounted to 2.69 
billion bushels (www.nass.usda.gov). The grain 
is primarily used to make flour for bread, pasta, 
cookies, and other foods. The United States exports 
more than 1.2 billion bushels of wheat annually (ERS 
2012). While wheat can be grown throughout the 
continental United States, production is concentrated 
in the Great Plains and the Columbia River Basin. 
Wheat varieties are classified as having a winter or 
spring habit, depending on whether the plants require 
a cold period to flower (vernalization). Different enduses 
require different types of grain characteristics, 
and market type and grain quality are important in 
understanding regional differences. 

Temperature Effects 

The foremost effect of temperature on wheat is an 
increase of the rate of development, thus reducing 
the length of the crop cycle, most notably duration of 
grain filling. The optimal temperatures for development 
are 20C to 30C (expressed as daily average 
temperatures), with grain filling having an upper 
maximum of 35C (Porter and Gawith 1999). Estimates 
of a lower limit for development up to anthesis 
are from -1C to 5 C (Porter and Gawith 1999). 
Leaf photosynthesis shows a broad optimum from 
15C to 30C (instantaneous temperature), but ceases 
by 45C (Bindraban 1999), agreeing with estimates 
that the lethal temperature for growth is around 
47C. Photosynthesis ceases near 1C. 

During vegetative growth, winter wheat can acclimate 
to temperatures below -10C, enabling survival 
during harsh winter conditions. Spring wheat lacks 
this capability, the difference relating to action of the 
vernalization loci that control growth habit (Dhillon 
et al. 2010). Frost events after jointing can sterilize 
the development of exposed spikelets, resulting in 
severe yield reductions (Marcellos 1977; Thakur et 
al. 2010). 

Heat stress disrupts sexual reproduction, and stress 
appears to disrupt multiple aspects of development, 
including pollen and ovule formation and early 
embryo development (Zinn et al. 2010). Wheat 
grown at 20C showed reduced grain set when 
transferred to 30C for 1 day (Saini and Aspinall 
1982). Ferris et al. (1998) showed that increasing 
the number of hours of exposure to temperatures 
above 31C resulted in reduction of grain numbers 
and lower grain biomass at harvest. Data from 
a temperature gradient tunnel (Wheeler et al. 
1996) suggested that grain-set ceased when the air 
temperature exceeded 40C for at least 30 minutes 
during a 5-day period ending at anthesis each day. 

Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

Wheat has the C3 photosynthetic mechanism, and 
photosynthesis responds strongly to short-term 
exposure to elevated CO2. An increase of CO2 
from 360 ppm to 720 ppm typically increases 
photosynthetic rates of well-lit leaves by 30% 
to 40%. However, with longer term exposure to 
elevated CO2, responses are less pronounced as 
the plant acclimates. Mechanisms for the lessened 
response involve multiple adaptations of the 
photosynthetic pathway (Osborne et al. 1998). 

Water Deficits 

Water transpired as CO2 is taken up for 
photosynthesis, additional water being lost through 
evaporation from the soil surface or deep drainage. 
Biomass production and grain yield typically 
increase linearly with water consumed by a crop 
(transpiration plus evaporation), but the quantitative 
relationship varies with climate and effects of other 
factors such as pests, weeds, and tillage practices. In 
the west-central Plains, Stone and Schlegel (2006) 
estimated that wheat yield (grain per unit of water 
transpired) increased 138 kilograms per hectare 
for every centimeter (i.e., water efficiency is 138 
kg ha.1cm-1) of water used with no-till and 86 kg 
ha.1cm-1 with conventional tillage. In the southern 
Plains, Musick et al. (1994) found that the response 
was 122 kg ha.1cm-1, combining data from dryland 
and irrigated systems, and in the Pacific Northwest, 
the response was 154 kg ha.1cm-1 (Schillinger et 
al. 2008). Much of U.S. wheat production occurs 
in areas where water deficits limit yields in most 
seasons, and droughts can cause crop failures over 
large regions. 

Excess water 

Waterlogging can reduce wheat yields 20% to 50% 
(Collaku and Harrison 2002), and prolonged flooding 
will kill a wheat crop. Flooding also can limit the 
area planted. Untimely rains delay plantings and 
harvests, and rains prior to harvest can cause preharvest 
sprouting, which lowers yield but more 
importantly, reduces grain quality (Nielsen et al. 
1982). 

Ozone 

Wheat has shown yield reductions under elevated 
atmospheric ozone that are considered intermediate 
among major crops (Heagle 1989). In studies with 
open-top chambers, yield responses have varied 
greatly, making it difficult to predict potential 
effects (Heagle 1989; Bender et al. 1999; Feng et 

Chapter 5 


al. 2008). Biswas et al. (2008) reported that wheat 
cultivars with higher stomatal conductance were 
more sensitive to ozone, which is consistent with the 
known mode of action of ozone, but suggests that 
apparent tolerance will decrease with yield potential. 

Pests, Diseases, and Weeds 

Potential effects of pests, diseases, and weeds 
include both direct effects on yield and wheat 
quality plus effects on production costs through the 
need for control measures (Coakley et al. 1999). 
Predicting climate change effects on organisms that 
interact with the wheat crop is essentially an order 
of magnitude more complex than direct effects on 
wheat crops per se. Few studies have examined 
interactions of climate change factors with biotic 
constraints affecting wheat. 

Pests 

Warmer temperatures typically increase rates of 
insect population growth, and warming is expected to 
extend the growing season in most U.S. agricultural 
regions, allowing pest populations to breed over a 
longer period each season. For many insect pests, 
cold winter weather severely reduces populations. 
Warmer winter temperatures could increase survival, 
leading to more rapid reestablishment each spring, 
further increasing severity of pest effects on agriculture 
(Bale et al. 2002). While warming also could aid 
beneficial species that feed on wheat pests, Hance 
et al. (2007) argued that warming may increase pest 
outbreaks because of disruption of co-evolved temporal 
or geographical synchronization. 

Hessian fly, the most important pest of wheat in 
the United States, is controlled in part by planting 
winter wheat when low temperatures reduce the 
activity of egg-laying flies (Harris et al. 2003). With 
warming, the onset of the fly-free period would be 
later, requiring farmers to plant later, which reduces 
yield potential. Numerous other insects affect wheat 
(Hatchett et al. 1987), both through direct feeding 
and as vectors for viruses (e.g., the barley yellow 
dwarf virus (BYDV)). 

Evidence for effects of CO2 on pest damage on 
wheat is scarce. A review by Sun et al. (2011), which 
included examples from wheat, noted that elevated 
CO2 can reduce the nutritional value of the plants 
sap to sucking insects, inducing greater feeding by 
aphids, but can increase the production of secondary 
plant-defense compounds that protect plants against 
insect damage. 

Diseases 

Wheat diseases differ in their temperature optima, 
and warming may alter the relative importance 
of major diseases. Among wheat rusts, stem rust 
reportedly prefers warmer temperatures than stripe 
or leaf rust (Garrett et al. 2006), but there is evidence 
for races (i.e., strains) of stripe rust that tolerate 
warmer conditions (Luck et al. 2011). Similar to 
pests, warming may increase overwintering of wheat 
diseases. Nonetheless, there is great uncertainty 
concerning the factors that determine whether or 
not a given wheat disease becomes established. 
For example, there are concerns that warming may 
allow Karnal bunt, a disease occurring in the head of 
wheat and barley, to become established in Europe 
(Peterson 2009). 

Pests and Management Effects 

As with pests and diseases, predicting crop-weed 
interactions under climate change has high uncertainty. 
The large effect of elevated CO2 on wheat 
growth and water use implies an elevated CO2 interaction 
with most environmental factors. Elevated 
CO2 will not offset temperature effects on development 
but, by reducing photorespiration, effects of 
high temperatures on photosynthesis are partially 
mitigated. Elevated CO2 can partially reduce water 
deficits through CO2-induced reduction of stomatal 
conductance (Kimball et al. 2002). 

The effect of CO2 on stomatal conductance also 
explains why elevated CO2 can reduce the effect of 
ozone on wheat yields (Feng et al. 2008). Wheat has 
shown yield reductions under elevated atmospheric 
ozone that are considered intermediate among major 
crops (Heagle 1989). In studies with open-top chambers, 
yield responses have varied greatly, making 
it difficult to predict potential effects (Bender et al. 
1999; Feng et al. 2008). Relative yield responses 
to CO2 under low N have been similar to responses 
with adequate N (Kimball et al. 2002), but clearly 
if potential grain yields increase under elevated 
CO2 plus warming, N inputs through fertilization 
will have to increase to match the increased crop N 
requirement. 

Elevated temperatures exacerbate water deficits by 
increasing ET. However, in regions where higher 
temperatures allow earlier resumption of growth in 
winter wheat, warming may enable crops to make 
better use of winter moisture and avoid larger, endof-
season atmospheric water demand. Earlier planting 
of spring wheat may result in similar benefits. 

Chapter 5 


Adaptation 

Crop genetics 

Time of anthesis in wheat is affected by genetic 
controls on day-length sensitivity, vernalization 
requirement, and intrinsic earliness. The inheritance 
from generation to generation of these plant 
parameters is reasonably well understood, so 
cultivars with modified flowering times could 
be bred to match changed planting dates and 
temperature regimes. However, the genetic controls 
of the duration of grain fill and of heat tolerance in 
growth processes are much less well understood. 
Genetic variation for response to CO2 is known 
(Manderscheid and Weigel 1997; Ziska et al. 2004), 
but breeding for increased responsiveness is very 
difficult given the lack of screening environments 
to select responsive varieties. Increases in 
responsiveness to CO2 likely would reduce watersaving 
benefits associated with elevated CO2. 

In the United States, dating to the Nations colonial 
period, farmers have continually adapted wheat and 
other crops to new or changing environments and 
circumstances (Olmstead and Rhode 2011). Recent 
examples of major changes in production practices 
include adoption of semi-dwarf wheats and no-till 
technologies. Thus, Olmstead and Rhode (2011) 
suggest that North American wheat farmers, who 
have long shown a remarkable ability to adapt, will 
be well positioned to manage in the face of climatic 
challenges. 

Crop management 

If provided credible guidance, including assessment 
of risk, especially from frost damage, producers can 
readily change planting dates and cultivars. Fertilizer 
regimes also will need to be adjusted according to 
changes in yield expectations. However, changes in 
pest, disease, or weed pressure would likely have to 
be managed on a case-by-case basis. 

Crop distribution 

An extreme adaptation to changing climate for a 
specific location is to change crops. Ortiz et al. 
(2008) suggested that by 2050 the spring wheat belt 
in North America might shift more than 10 degrees 
latitude northward, into western Canada. Although 
not explicitly discussed, presumably winter wheat 
would move north into former spring wheat regions 
and portions of the southern-most winter wheat 
lands would become unsuitable for wheat. Hubbard 
and Flores-Mendoza (1995) predicted that warming 
would substantially increase land used for growing 
wheat. One intriguing option is that the Southern 
United States might become more suitable for 
winter-sown spring wheat. 

Cotton 

Cotton is the principal fiber crop grown in the United 
States with more than 14.7 million planted acres 
during the 2011 growing season (NASS 2011). 
Upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) is grown 
throughout the entire U.S. cotton production belt and 
makes up the bulk of U.S. cotton production (14.4 
million acres planted). Pima cotton (Gossypium 
barbadense L.) production constitutes the remaining 
portion of U.S. cotton (300,000 acres planted), with 
production primarily confined to the Western States 
of California and Arizona. In 2011, Upland cotton 
production contributed approximately $6.6 billion 
to the U.S. farm economy, while Pima production 

Chapter 5 

An extreme adaptation 
to changing climate for 
a specific location is to 
change crops. 


Estimated Effects: Empirical Evidence 

Free-Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) studies are thought to provide the most reliable estimates of wheat 
response to CO2. Yield increases for 200 ppm above ambient CO2 average +12% (Kimball 2011), with 
response as high as 25% under water deficits (Kimball et al. 2002). Field-based estimates of the impacts 
of warming on wheat come primarily from analyses of historical yield data and from field experiments 
where planting dates or other manipulations were used to alter the temperature regime. Estimates of 
yield decreases have ranged 4% to 6% per degree warming. In recent work combining infrared heating 
and altered planting dates (Ottman et al. 2012), grain yield of spring wheat declined about 6% per 
degree warming during grain filling. Lobell et al. (2011) analyzed historic wheat yield data and found a 
5% decrease in yield per 1C increase. These substantial effects largely result from the impact of warming 
on crop duration and thus exclude potentially offsetting benefits from management adaptations such as 
changing in planting dates or cultivars. They also ignore the beneficial effect of elevated CO2 on biomass 
production and yield. 


contributed approximately $670 million. Thus, cotton 
production is a major contributor to the U.S. farm 
economy and any effect that climate change has on 
cotton production will be felt throughout the U.S. 
economy. 

Upland and Pima cotton are both indeterminate 
perennial crops, that is, they bear produce over the 
season, but they are cultured as annuals. As such, 
their ability to flower over an extended period of time 
during the growing season might buffer reproductive 
response to climate change. However, their growth, 
development, and performance will be affected by 
the changing environmental landscape. 

Temperature Effects 

Cotton in its native state grows as a perennial 
shrub in a semi-desert habitat and requires warm 
temperatures. However, despite originating in hot 
climates, cotton does not necessarily grow and 
yield best at excessively high temperatures, and 
a negative correlation has been reported between 
yield and high temperature during flowering and 
early boll development (Oosterhuis 1999). Although 
cotton is sensitive to high temperature at all stages 
of development, it is particularly sensitive during 
reproductive development, and environmental 
stress during floral development represents a major 
limitation to crop development and productivity 
(Snider et al. 2010; Oosterhuis and Snider 2011). 
Furthermore, the effects on growth from elevated 
temperatures during the night may be of more 
importance than during the day. High temperatures 
can have direct inhibitory effects on both growth 
and yield and can create high evaporative demand 
leading to more intense water stress (Hall 2001). 

No clear consensus exists about the optimum 
temperature for cotton, as plant response varies 
with plant developmental stage, plant organ, and the 
environment in which the cultivar was developed 
(Burke and Wanjura 2009). The ideal temperature 
range for cotton shown from growth chamber studies 
in Mississippi is from 20C to 30C (Reddy et al. 
1991), and the optimal thermal kinetic window for 
enzyme activity in which metabolic activity is most 
efficient for Upland cotton was from 23C to 32C 
(Burke et al. 1988). Cotton growth and reproductive 
development are severely inhibited at temperatures 
in excess of this optimal day/night temperature 
regime. These higher temperatures commonly 
occur in the U.S. Cotton Belt during flowering and 

Chapter 5 

Estimated Effects: Process-based Modeling 

More than 35 peer-reviewed studies have simulated potential impacts of climate change on wheat in 
the United States.This technical document largely relies on recent studies (2003 or newer) that consider 
adaptation through changes in planting dates and cultivar phenology. Much of this research assesses 
methodological issues in combination with potential impacts and generally highlighted uncertainties 
caused by differences among GCMs and downscaling approaches. 

For the Pacific Northwest, results from Stckle et al. (2010) suggest that winter wheat yields are likely to 
increase about 20% by 2040 and by 30% by 2080. For spring wheats, in contrast, yields would increase 
only 7% by 2040 and 3% by 2080. For both growth habits, responses varied among sites, demonstrating 
the importance of local temperature and precipitation regimes. 

In the southern Great Plains, Zhang et al. (2011) reported no change in winter wheat yields for the 
period 2010-2039. Simulations of winter wheat in the Southeast using GCM and regional climate model 
scenarios corresponding roughly to 2090 (Tsvetsinskaya et al. 2003), showed 25% and 21% yield 
reductions, respectively. The largest reductions were for Florida (58% and 50%). The study assumed a 
fixed cultivar over the region; the results from other regions suggest leads to overestimation of negative 
impacts of climate change. 

Overall, the trend seems to be one of beneficial long-term effects of concurrent climate change and 
elevated CO2 on winter wheat yield at higher U.S. latitudes, with declining benefits turning into negative 
effects towards lower latitudes. 


boll development and, depending on the timing 
and severity of the stress, can represent a serious 
limitation to yield. With projected temperature 
increases from climate change, this is likely to 
become even more important. However, cotton is 
successfully grown at temperatures in excess of 40C 
in India and Pakistan, indicating some tolerance to 
high temperature in cotton germplasm (living tissue 
from which new plants can be grown, e.g., a seed). 

High temperature plays a vital role in germination 
and emergence, and in subsequent stand 
development, fruiting patterns, and final yield. 
As maximum temperatures increase, cotton 
developmental events occur much more rapidly 
(Reddy, K.R. et al. 1995). The optimum temperature 
for stem and leaf growth of cotton is about 30C 
(Hodges et al. 1993), and once temperatures 
are above 35C, leaf area declines (Reddy et al. 
1992a; Bibi 2010). Decreases in shoot biomass of 
Upland and Pima cotton occur with temperatures 
exceeding 30C (Reddy et al. 1991). The number 
of vegetative and fruiting branches produced per 
plant is strongly influenced by temperature, with an 
increase in vegetative branches and a decrease in 
fruiting branches with high temperatures (Hodges 
et al. 1993). Roots generally have a lower optimum 
temperature range for growth than shoots, with 
optimum temperatures reported to be 30C (Arndt 
1945; Pearson et al. 1970). McMichael and Burke 
(1994) showed that root growth was enhanced when 
the root temperatures were within or below cottons 
thermal kinetic window (i.e., optimal temperature 
range). 

Reproductive growth is generally much more 
sensitive to high temperatures than vegetative growth 
(Singh et al. 2007). The flowering period of cotton 
is reported to be the most sensitive phase to elevated 
temperatures (Reddy et al. 1996; Oosterhuis 2002). 
This is because a number of reproductive processes 
must occur in a highly sequential fashion during 
pollination to fertilization for successful fertilization 
and seed production to occur (Reddy et al. 1996). 
Successful pollination, pollen germination, pollen 
tube growth, and subsequent fertilization of the ovule 
are prerequisites for seed formation in cotton; seeds 
with their associated fibers are the basic components 
of yield. 

Depending upon the duration, timing, and severity of 
the heat stress, fertilization could be limited by poor 
pollination, decreased pollen germination, or limited 
pollen tube growth. Sensitivity of reproductive 
organs to heat stress was attributed to the sensitivity 
of pollen grains to high temperature extremes. A 
positive correlation exists between anther sterility 
and the maximum temperatures at 15 and 16 
days prior to anthesis (Meyer 1966). However, 
Barrow (1983) reported that pollen viability and 
germinability were unaffected by pretreating 
pollen with temperatures as high as 40C, whereas 
penetration of the stigma, style, and ovules was 
negatively affected at 33C and above. Snider et al. 
(2011) confirmed that pollen tube growth rate was 
more sensitive to high temperature than any of the 
processes occurring during anthesis. The optimal 
temperature range for cotton pollen germination 
is between 28C and 37C, whereas the optimal 
temperature for pollen tube growth is from 28C 
to 32C for a range of Upland cultivars (Burke et 
al. 1988; Kakani et al. 2005). Poor fertilization 
efficiency under high temperature accounts for the 
decline in seed number observed for cotton exposed 
to high temperature conditions in both the field 
(Pettigrew 2008) and the growth chamber (Snider et 
al. 2009; Bibi 2010). 

The sequence of reproductive development is also 
hastened as temperatures increase (i.e., the time to 
the appearance of first square (fruiting bud), first 
flower, and first mature open boll decreased as 
the average temperature for each event increased) 
(Reddy et al. 1996). In addition, the time required 
for development of flowers up the main stem 
and the vertical flowering interval increase with 
increasing temperature (Hodges et al. 1993). The 
total number of fruiting sites produced increased 
approximately 50% as the temperature increased 
from 30C to 40C, whereas at temperatures above 
35C abscission of bolls increased sharply with near 
zero retention of bolls at 40C (Hodges et al. 1993). 
Boll retention decreases significantly under high 
temperature (Reddy et al. 1991; Reddy et al. 1992b; 
Zhao et al. 2005) and is reported to be the most heat 
sensitive component of cotton yield, with enhanced 
abortion of squares and young bolls at temperatures 
above 30C for both Pima and Upland cotton (Reddy 
et al. 1991). 

Final cotton yield has also been shown to be strongly 
influenced by temperature (Wanjura et al. 1969), with 
a negative correlation between cotton lint yield and 
high temperature reported for the Mississippi Delta 
(Oosterhuis 2002). High, above average temperatures 
during the day can decrease photosynthesis and 
carbohydrate production (Bibi et al. 2008), and high 
night temperatures will increase respiration and 
further decrease available carbohydrates (Gipson and 
Joham 1968; Loka and Oosterhuis 2010), resulting in 
decreased seed set, reduced boll size and decreased 
number of seeds per boll, and reductions in number 
of fibers per seed (Arevalo 2008). 

Chapter 5 


Boll number and boll size, cottons basic yield components, 
are negatively affected by high temperature. 
Boll retention has been shown to decrease significantly 
under high temperature (Reddy et al. 1991; 
Reddy et al. 1992a; Zhao et al. 2005), with temperatures 
in excess of a 30C/20C day/night temperature 
regime resulting in significantly lower boll retention 
due to enhanced abortion of squares and young 
bolls (Reddy et al. 1991). Zhao et al. (2005) found 
that cotton plants exposed to a 36C/28C day/ 
night growth temperature regime retained approximately 
70% fewer bolls than plants grown under a 
30C/22C day/night temperature regime. In addition 
to negatively affecting boll retention, temperatures in 
excess of the optimum also resulted in decreased boll 
size (Reddy et al. 1999; Pettigrew 2008). 

The number of seeds per boll is an important basic 
component of cotton yield (Groves 2009) and 
accounts for more than 80% of total yield variability. 
High-temperature stress is a major factor 
negatively affecting seed development. Pettigrew 
(2008) reported that slight elevations in daily maxmin 
temperatures of approximately 1C under field 
conditions were not sufficient to cause a decline in 
seed weight, but were sufficient to cause a significant 
decline in seed number per boll, which was the primary 
cause of reduced yield under high temperature 
conditions. This confirmed observations of Lewis 
(2000), who showed that a lower average number of 
seeds per boll (23.6 seeds/boll) developed in a hot 
year (mean maximum daily temperature of 36.6C 
for July) compared to 28 seeds/boll in a cool year 
(mean maximum daily temperature of 32.2C for 
July). He concluded that about 99% of the variation 
in seed numbers per area in his 3-year study was 
explained by changes in the mean maximum July 
temperatures when flowering occurred. Although 
Pettigrew (2008) observed declines in boll size and 
lint percent, boll size was more negatively affected 
than was lint percent; therefore, the author concluded 
that decreased seed number caused a decline in boll 
size and lint yield. Furthermore, Pettigrew (2008) 
speculated that heat stress may have decreased seed 
number by compromising ovule fertilization, which 
was subsequently confirmed by Snider et al. (2009). 

Higher temperatures adversely influence the growth, 
development, and yield of cotton, and with the 
increased concern about climate change, this has 
focused attention on the need for enhanced thermotolerance 
in commercial cultivars. A number of 
researchers have documented genotypic thermotolerance 
in cotton (Taha et al. 1981; Brown and 
Zeiher 1998; Cottee et al. 2007; Snider et al. 2010). 
However, although genotypic variation exists in 
the cotton germplasm pool, this has generally not 
been exploited in Upland cotton breeding programs. 
Oosterhuis et al. (2009) reported that breeding trials 
do not indicate substantial genotypic differences in 
Upland cotton grown in the U.S. Cotton Belt that 
may be exploited by plant breeders for improved 
thermotolerance. However, substantial thermotolerance 
exists in foreign cultivars from warmer climates 
(Snider et al. 2010; Snider et al. 2011b), as well as in 
wild type cotton strains (Bibi 2010). 

Pima cotton appears to be more tolerant to higher 
temperatures than Upland Delta-type cotton (Hodges 
et al. 1993), and breeders have improved yields in 
Pima cotton by increasing high-temperature tolerance 
(Kittock et al. 1988). Although little progress has 
been made in improving high-temperature tolerance 
in U.S. commercial Upland cotton cultivars, there 
appears to be substantial thermotolerance in wild 
type Upland genetic material collected from areas 
where cotton grows under conditions of extreme heat 
such as southern Mexico (Bibi 2010). It has been 
speculated that modern cotton cultivars are more sensitive 
to environmental stress conditions compared to 
obsolete (older than 30 years) cultivars. Brown and 
Oosterhuis (2010) showed that modern Upland cultivars 
had improved physiological responses (leaf photosynthesis, 
chlorophyll fluorescence, and membrane 
integrity) under ideal temperature environments 
(30C), whereas obsolete cultivars were less sensitive 
in high temperature (38C) conditions. A similar conclusion 
was reached by Fitzsimons and Oosterhuis 
(2011) in an analysis of long-term temperatures and 
yields in the eastern Arkansas. Snider et al. (2010) 
showed that genotypic differences in reproductive 
thermotolerance of Upland cotton is closely associated 
with the thermal stability of the subtending leaf, 
and the energetic status (carbohydrates and Adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP)) and pre-stress antioxidant 
enzyme activity of the pistil are strong determinants 
of reproductive thermotolerance in cotton. 

The consequences of increased temperatures during 
the growing season are that cotton seed and fiber 
yields are likely to be reduced. However, the cotton 
crop does have some innate thermosensitivity 
through acclimation to higher temperatures, within 
the limits of the thresholds of temperature effects on 
physiological processes. Also, even though the cotton 
crop is particularly sensitive to high temperature 
during flowering, due to its perennial nature and 
indeterminate growth habit, compensation can 
occur for short periods of heat stress. For example, 
variation in temperatures during the cropping season 
allows some flowers during the flowering period 
to escape exposure to damaging temperatures such 

Chapter 5 

Higher temperatures 
adversely influence the 
growth, development, 
and yield of cotton, 
and with the increased 
concern about climate 
change, this has 
focused attention on 
the need for enhanced 
thermotolerance in 
commercial cultivars. 


that some bolls are produced; also, boll retention 
following periods of heat stress will be increased. 
Higher temperatures together with associated 
changes in precipitation patterns are likely to change 
the geographical areas suited to cotton production. 

Moisture Stress 

Many of the climate change projection scenario 
outcomes show altered precipitation distribution patterns. 
These alterations in distribution can result in 
an area receiving more or less precipitation than has 
occurred historically. These disruptions also mean an 
area may now experience precipitation extremes with 
cotton encountering either flooding or drought stress 
during one of the critical stages of growth. 

Considerable literature exists on research conducted 
over the years on the effects of drought stress on 
cotton production; most of this literature has been 
summarized in a recently published book chapter 
(Loka et al. 2011). Moisture deficit stress reduces 
overall plant stature, resulting in plants with less 
leaf area production (Turner et al. 1986; Ball et al. 
1994; Gerik et al. 1996; Pettigrew 2004a). Reduced 
photosynthetic activity and increased leaf senescence 
are also caused by moisture deficit stress in cotton 
(Constable and Rawson 1980; Perry and Krieg, 1981; 
Marani et al. 1985; Faver et al. 1996; Pettigrew 
2004a). This reduced photosynthetic activity, coupled 
with reduced photosynthesizing leaf area, decreases 
the total amount of available assimilates for droughtstressed 
cotton plants to utilize for further growth, 
vegetative or reproductive. 

Drought stress can ultimately lead to lint yield 
reductions, with the production of fewer bolls per 
unit of ground area being the principal yield component 
affected (Stockton et al. 1961; Bruce and 
Shipp 1962; Grimes et al. 1969; Gerik et al. 1996; 
Pettigrew 2004b). Fewer bolls are produced primarily 
because of reduced flower production, but also 
because of increased boll abortions when the stress 
is extreme and occurs during reproductive growth 
(Grimes and Yamada 1982; McMichael and Hesketh 
1982; Turner et al. 1986; Gerik et al. 1996; Pettigrew 
2004b). Flowering and reproductive growth occur 
over a more extended period of the growing season 
compared to the determinate crop species that flower 
during a brief period. Depending upon the severity 
and duration of the stress, cotton can tolerate 
some moisture stress better than determinate crops 
by somewhat compensating for any reproductive 
loss during the stress period with production in the 
remaining unstressed reproductive period. 

Fiber quality can also be compromised through 
exposure to moisture deficit stress, and fiber length 
can be reduced when moisture deficit stress is severe 
and occurs shortly after flowering (Eaton and Ergle 
1952; Bennett 1967; Marani and Amirav 1971; Pettigrew 
2004b). Fiber micronaire, an estimate of fiber 
fineness, can be inconsistently affected by drought. 
Depending upon when the stress occurs and its 
duration, micronaire can either be decreased (Eaton 
and Ergle 1952; Marani and Amirav 1971; Ramey, 
1986; Pettigrew 2004b) or increased (Bradow 2000; 
McWilliams 2003). These micronaire variations are 
thought to be tied to how the drought stress affects 
the relationship between the photo-assimilate supply 
(i.e., nutritional energy source) and the boll load 
(nutritional energy sink) (Pettigrew 1995). 

A second consequence of altered precipitation 
distribution patterns is the potential for intermittent 
flooding events to occur during the growing season. 
Unfortunately, not as much research has been 
conducted on flooding or waterlogged conditions 
as has occurred for drought stress conditions. Yield 
losses are often associated with flooding events 
due to a reduced number of bolls being produced 
(Bange et al. 2004). Overall, plant dry matter was 
reduced by flooding because of a reduction in 
the efficiency of solar radiation use rather than a 
reduction in solar radiation interception. Reinforcing 
the lower radiation use efficiency observed with 
flooding, Conaty et al. (2008) reported reduced leaf 
photosynthetic rates when a flooding event occurred. 
Flooding that occurred during the early squaring 
period was more detrimental to yield production than 
when the flooding occurred during the peak green 
boll period (Bange et al. 2004). 

 

Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

Almost all the future climate change forecasts call for 
and are based upon greater concentrations of atmospheric 
CO2. Because cotton is a C3 plant, it exhibits 
a positive photosynthetic and growth response 
as the ambient CO2 concentration is elevated. In 
controlled environment chambers, K.R. Reddy et 
al. (1995, 1997) and V.R. Reddy et al. (1995) were 
able to demonstrate increased leaf photosynthesis, 
with decreased stomatal conductance, greater total 
biomass production, and increased boll yield when 
CO2 levels were increased from 350 to 700 ppm. 
This increased photosynthesis coupled with the 
reduced stomatal conductance under elevated CO2 
conditions also led to increased water-use efficiency. 
An increase in CO2 levels, in and of itself, was not 
observed to have profound effects on the quality of 
the lint produced (Reddy et al. 1999). 

Many of the phenomena observed in these controlled 
environment chamber studies were confirmed in an 
Arizona field situation under a FACE environment, 

Chapter 5 


with CO2 concentration elevated to 550 ppm. Photosynthesis 
(Hileman et al. 1994; Idso et al. 1994) and 
water-use efficiency (Mauney et al. 1994) increased 
in elevated CO2 conditions. Water-use efficiency 
increased due to increased above-ground biomass 
production, rather than reduced water use (Mauney 
et al. 1994). The CO2 enrichment increased cotton 
height, leaf area, above-ground biomass, and reproductive 
output, but not the total root biomass (Derner 
et al. 2003). Cotton grown in these FACE environments 
accumulated more total plant nutrients, but 
had lower tissue nutrient concentrations than cotton 
grown in ambient CO2 levels (Prior et al. 1998). The 
increased total nutrient uptake but decreased nutrient 
concentration occurred because while above-ground 
biomass production increased, thereby increasing 
total uptake, the increased amount of nutrients was 
diluted across a greater biomass. The researchers also 
observed that under elevated CO2 conditions, nutrient 
uptake from the soil increased, as did nutrient-use 
efficiency when compared to cotton grown under 
ambient CO2; yields increased 43% in these FACE 
environments (Mauney et al. 1994). 

Adaptation 

The front line of defense for cotton producers, if projected 
climate change scenarios play out, will be an 
evaluation and appropriate alteration of production 
practices. Water management capabilities could play 
a major role in enabling producers to maintain economically 
viable operations as the climate changes. 
Obviously, irrigation will be enormously important in 
areas where alterations in rainfall distribution lead to 
episodes of moisture-deficit stress occurring. Irrigation 
is also important in helping the plant mitigate the 
detrimental effects from excessively high temperature. 
The plants ability to lower tissue temperature 
through transpirational cooling is dependent upon an 
adequate moisture supply. However, water use for 
cotton irrigation will have to compete with industrial 
and urban municipal use for the dwindling ground 
and surface water supply in many areas. Advances 
in subsurface drip-irrigation, low energy precision 
application (LEPA) irrigation, and furrow-dikes can 
aid cotton producers in making more efficient use 
of this limited resource (Bordovsky 1992; Sorensen 
et al. 2011). In areas where flooding could become 
more problematic as the climate changes, landforming 
procedures may be needed on some fields to 
promote rapid water runoff. 

One of the consequences of warmer temperatures 
on cotton production is an extension of the growing 
season length. This opportunity provides producers 
with more flexibility with planting and production 
decisions. Research has demonstrated improved 
yield potential when cotton in the Mississippi Delta 
is planted earlier than during the period traditionally 
considered as the optimum planting window 
(Pettigrew 2002). This approach allows much of the 
cotton crop to be produced prior to the onset of many 
late-season stresses (high temperature, moisture deficit, 
and heavy insect infestations). Alternatively, the 
longer growing season also allows for expansion of 
the area in which cotton can be successfully doublecropped 
(two crops per year) behind other crops such 
as wheat (Wiatrak et al. 2005; Wiatrak et al. 2006). 

Another consequence of a warming climate is that 
cotton can be grown further north than its traditional 
planting region. For instance, cotton acreage 
in Kansas has increased from 1,500 acres in 1990 
to 38,000 acres in 2009, with the acreage peaking 
in 2006 at approximately 115,000 acres (USDA 
1990-2010). However, most of this Kansas acreage 
increase occurred due to economic considerations 
rather than a dramatic shift in climatic conditions. 
Nevertheless, a warmer climate could allow cotton to 
encroach further north into regions traditionally used 
for corn, soybean, or wheat production. 

Genetics may offer additional tools for producers 
to deal with elements of projected climate change. 
Many cotton genetics programs are trying to develop 
germplasm with tolerance to various direct (abiotic) 
stresses (Allen and Aleman 2011). Efforts have been 
put forth using molecular markers to identify and 
characterize quantitative trait loci (QTL) associated 
with abiotic stress tolerance in cotton (Paterson et al. 
2003; Saranga et al. 2004). For the most part, these 
efforts have focused on mining traits and genetic 
variability within the cotton germplasm pool and 
other closely related Gossypium species. 

Alternatively, genes associated with targeted biochemical 
pathways involved in conveying a stress 
tolerance that come from a completely different 
source could be introduced into the cotton genome 
through transgenic technologies. Although the 
use of transgenic technology can provide a more 
focused approach to genetic manipulations, it also 
comes with its own set of problems, such as how 
the inserted foreign DNA could affect native physiological 
processes. Nevertheless, many private and 
public breeding programs are devoting resources to 
select for drought and temperature stress tolerance. 
However, these traits are highly complex, which dictate 
that progress will be slow to occur. Most of the 
initial screening and selecting of lines has occurred 
in controlled environments, such as greenhouse or 
growth chambers. Field testing and confirmation 
of these stress tolerance traits has not proceeded as 
fast. As of now, no cotton varieties with consistently 
demonstrable abiotic stress tolerance are available 

Chapter 5 

Genetics may offer 
additional tools for 
producers to deal with 
elements of projected 
climate change. 


for cotton producers to utilize in production systems. 
It may be many years before any such varieties with 
useful stress tolerance are available on the market. 

Annual Specialty Crops 

Specialty crops are defined in law as fruits and vegetables, 
tree nuts, dried fruits, and horticulture and 
nursery crops, including floriculture. Annual specialty 
crops include many vegetable and fruit plants, 
each with their own environmental preferences. The 
primary annual specialty crops, for which production 
data are annually collected by the USDAs National 
Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA-NASS) are 
listed in Table 5.2. Of these 29 crops, most are considered 
popularly to be vegetables, and the remainder 
 strawberries and three kinds of melon  are considered 
fruits. The USDA recommends that the human 
diet include half vegetables and fruits (http://www. 
choosemyplate.gov/print-materials-ordering/dietaryguidelines.
html), thus potential effects of climate 
change on this group of crops are of high interest. 

The primary States that produce annual specialty 
crops are, in order of total production, California, 
Florida, Arizona, Georgia, and New York (USDA- 

Chapter 5 

Table 5.2. Principal annual specialty crops for fresh market, 2010 production acreages, values, and primary production 
States obtained from the USDA-NASS, Vegetables 2010 Summary, January 2011. 2009 values for potatoes, sweet potatoes, 
and dry beans were obtained from the USDA-National Agricultural Statistics Service, Agricultural Statistics, Chapter IV, 
Statistics of Vegetables and Melons, United States, Government Printing Office, Washington: 2010). Only includes estimates 
for the selected crops in the NASS annual program. These crops are not estimated for all states that might produce them. 
*Includes processing total for dual usage crops. 

 Main production states by acres planted 
Production 
1,000 Cwt 
Acres 
harvested 
Value total 
dollars 
Value 
dollars/acre 
No. 
states 
listed 1 2 3 4 5 
Artichokes* 900 7,200 $46,350,000 $6,438 1 CA 
Asparagus* 799 28,000 $90,777,000 $3,242 3 CA MI WA 
Beans, dry 
edible 25,360 1,463,000 $793,722,000 $543 19 ND MI MN NE ID 
Beans, Snap 5,062 88,500 $303,679,000 $3,431 11 FL GA TN CA NY 
Broccoli * 18,219 121,700 $648,886,000 $5,332 2 CA AZ 
Cabbage 22,797 66,400 $378,404,000 $5,699 14 CA NY FL TX GA 
Cantaloupes 18,838 74,730 $314,379,000 $4,207 9 CA AZ GA TX IN 
Carrots 22,777 68,000 $597,362,000 $8,785 3 CA MI TX 
Cauliflower* 6,281 36,360 $247,456,000 $6,806 3 CA AZ NY 
Celery* 20,285 28,500 $398,854,000 $13,995 2 CA MI 
Corn, Sweet 29,149 247,200 $750,467,000 $3,036 26 FL CA GA NY OH 
Cucumbers 8,482 43,900 $193,643,000 $4,411 11 FL GA NC MI CA 
Garlic* 3,737 22,750 $265,510,000 $11,671 3 CA NV OR 
Honeydews 3,204 14,700 $49,608,000 $3,375 3 CA AZ TX 
Lettuce (total) 87,189 267,300 $2,249,998,000 $8,418 4 CA AZ 
Head 50,750 139,000 $1,205,575,000 $8,673 2 CA AZ 
Leaf 11,180 48,000 $429,432,000 $8,947 3 CA AZ 
Romaine 25,259 80,300 $614,991,000 $7,659 4 CA AZ 
Onions* 73,213 149,670 $1,383,595,000 $9,244 12 CA WA OR GA NY 
Peppers, Bell* 15,739 52,700 $637,113,000 $12,089 7 CA FL GA NC NJ 
Peppers, Chile* 4,502 22,500 $135,364,000 $6,016 4 NM TX CA AZ 
Potatoes 431,425 1,045,000 $3,452,276,000 $3,304 30 ID WA ND WI CO 
Pumpkins* 10,624 48,500 $116,539,000 $2,403 6 IL MI OH NY PA 
Spinach 6,133 38,900 $256,924,000 $6,605 4 CA AZ NJ TX 
Squash* 6,542 43,500 $203,592,000 $4,680 12 FL MI CA NY GA 
Tomatoes 28,916 104,500 $1,390,754,000 $13,309 14 CA FL TN OH VA 
Strawberries* 28,501 56,990 $2,245,319,000 $39,398 10 CA FL OR NY NC 
Sweet potatoes 19,469 96,900 $410,361,000 $4,235 9 NC CA LA MS FL 
NASS, 2011), though for any particular crop the 
number and identity of States considered to contribute 
significantly to the annual harvest varies (Table 
5.2). As many as 30 States contribute to the annual 
potato harvest, while only California contributes 
significantly to the artichoke supply. California is the 
leading producer of 19 of the 29 listed annual specialty 
crops and is among the top 5 production States 
for all specialty crops except for potatoes, dry beans, 
and pumpkins. Projected climatic changes, including 
changed precipitation regimes and increased temperature 
for agriculturally important parts of California, 
are of great importance to future production of 
annual specialty crops. 

Temperature Effects 

Temperature is a major environmental change 
expected to affect production of annual specialty 
crops. Warm-weather crops such as tomato have 
different temperature responses than cool-weather 
crops such as potato, lettuce, and onion (McKeown 
et al. 2004; Else and Atkinson 2010). In addition, the 
various crops are sensitive to specific forms of stress, 
such as periods of hot days, overall growing season 
climate, minimum and maximum daily temperatures, 
and timing of stress in relationship to developmental 
stages (Ghosh 2000; Pressman et al. 2002; McKeown 
et al. 2005; Snsteby and Heide 2008; Dufault et al. 
2009). 

For mild heat stress (a 1C to 4C increase above 
optimal growth temperature), a common result is 
moderately reduced yield (Sato 2006; Timlin et al. 
2006; Wagstaffe and Battey 2006; Tesfaendrias et 
al. 2010). Plants were most sensitive to heat stress 7 
to 15 days before anthesis, consistent with a critical 
time in pollen development. More intense heat 
stress (generally greater than 4C increase over 
optimum) leads to severe yield loss up to and including 
complete failure of marketable produce (Ghosh 
2000; Sato et al. 2000; Kadir et al. 2006; Gote and 
Padghan 2009; Tesfaendrias et al. 2010). Ample 
evidence exists that temperature effects on yield loss 
varies among crops. For example, tomatoes under 
heat stress struggle to produce viable pollen, though 
their leaves remain active. The dysfunctional or 
non-viable pollen does not properly pollinate flowers, 
causing a failure in fruit set (Sato et al. 2000). 
If the same stressed plants are cooled to normal 
temperatures for 10 days before flower pollination, 
and then returned to high heat, they are able develop 
fruit. Alternately, the reason some heat tolerant 
tomatoes perform better than others appears to be, in 
part, related to a superior ability to create successful 
pollen even in adverse conditions (Peet et al. 2003; 
Sato 2006). At least one report identifies a similar 
role for pollen development as a facet of strawberry 
heat tolerance (Ledesma and Sugiyama 2005). 

Water Deficits 

For many annual specialty crops, ample water is 
essential to achieve high yields while maintaining 
a quality acceptable to consumers, and drought is 
highly detrimental to yield and quality. Depending 
on the cultivated variety, strawberries produced with 
less than optimal amounts of water have reduced leaf 
area, root development, and reduced berry size and 
yield (Bordonaba and Terry 2010; Klamkowski and 
Treder 2008). Yields of potato in drought conditions 
are reduced, especially when temperatures and 
wind speeds are high (Wolf 2002). The amount of 
water needed to produce a crop varies according to 
how the crop is managed and environmental factors 
such as temperature, light, and wind. The ranges in 
the amount of water needed to raise a crop based on 
management and environment are very large (tomato, 
2.58-11.88 kg.m-3; potato, 1.92-5.25 kg.m-3; melon, 
2.46-8.49 kg.m-3; watermelon, 2.70-14.33 kg.m-3; 
and cantaloupe, 4.18-8.65 kg.m-3) and call attention 
to the need for continued research on water management 
in crop production (Rashidi and Gholami 
2008). Even apparently minor differences in furrow 
orientation resulted in yield reduction of onion, a 
crop not known as terribly drought sensitive except 
at the seedling establishment stage; changes in row 
direction can change plant evapotranspiration and 
potentially lead to greater accumulation of harmful 
salts in the soil (Villafae and Hernndez 2000). 

To compensate for the uncertainties of precipitation, 
many annual specialty crops are grown with 
irrigation. For these crops, drought is a less pressing 
issue as long as there is an ample water reservoir for 
agriculture and other users and the cost to irrigate is 
affordable. Under circumstances where water use is 
restricted or costly, as is the case in California and 
Arizona (two major annual specialty crop production 
States), production of some crops may become less 
profitable if current climate and trends continue. This 
may shift cultivation to the other States with more 
available water. 

Excess Water 

Other specialty crop States, such as Florida, Georgia, 
and New York, and much of the East Coast, have 
been receiving increased precipitation. Since 
precipitation has been and is expected to occur in 
more extreme events, the primary benefit will be in 
the form of a reservoir of irrigation water. 

Severe flooding reduces yield by killing plants, 
while less severe flooding changes the plant in ways 

Chapter 5 

Under circumstances 
where water use is 
restricted or costly, as is 
the case in California and 
Arizona (two major annual 
specialty crop production 
States), production of some 
crops may become less 
profitable if current climate 
and trends continue. This 
may shift cultivation to 
the other States with more 
available water. 


that cause it to be weaker, potentially diminishing 
its yield. As a consequence of moderate flooding 
of strawberries, for example, fruit yield, total leaf 
area, and weight decreased, while dead leaf area 
increased, with one cultivated variety (cultivar) 
more sensitive to flooding than others (Casierra- 
Posada 2007). Tomato tolerance to flooding is also 
cultivar dependent (Ezin et al. 2010). Even storms 
that produce only minor flooding or no flooding can 
damage marketable yield. For example, tomatoes 
are famous for cracking and splitting after a storm. 
Strawberry flavor is so strongly affected by water 
availability that strawberries grown in excess 
water have lower sugar content and taste watery, 
while carefully restricting water can be used to 
increase sugar content and make them taste sweeter 
(Bordonaba and Terry 2010). 

Extreme Events 

Extreme precipitation events will be damaging to 
crops due to a combination of heavy rain that can 
physically injure plant parts, inject excessive water in 
the root zone, result in physical damage if high winds 
accompany rainstorms, and increase pressure from 
some fungal and bacterial diseases. 

Many plants fall over in high winds associated with 
storms. Their stems can break, and plants such as 
tomatoes can lose all their fruit without stem support. 
Wind can also reduce yield of short plants without 
a main stem (e.g., strawberries) by causing physical 
damage to the plant (Peri and Bloomberg 2002), and 
can even reduce yield of root crops such as onion 
(Greenland 2000). 

Solar Radiation Effects 

Another environmental condition associated with 
increased precipitation is reduced light from overcast 
conditions. In the extreme, reduced light will reduce 
yields, and optimal light levels depend on crop, 
cultivar, and growing conditions. Higher light levels 
seem to be important for allowing maximum uptake 
of excess CO2 by tomatoes (Tartachnyk and Blanke 
2007). On cloudy days, tomato leaves were unable 
to make use of the additional photosynthetic building 
blocks supplied by elevated CO2 levels, but the 
amount of CO2 in a greenhouse atmosphere dropped 
sharply on sunny days because it was being incorporated 
into plant growth. In greenhouses in southern 
Ontario, high concentrations of CO2 coupled with 
high light intensity provided measurable gains in 
yield compared to low light intensity. Given sufficient 
light and water, plants quickly benefited from 
increased atmospheric CO2 (Hao 2008). Finally, 
a computer model simulating growth conditions 
of high CO2 levels and moderate light intensity 
predicted 
approximately a 17% increase in tomato 
yield. These results were corroborated by 2 years of 
field trials (Heuvelink et al. 2008). Therefore, light 
intensity is an additional critical factor in predicting 
plant response to increased atmospheric CO2 
concentrations. 

Moderate light reduction improves both yield and 
quality of several annual specialty crops. Repeatfruiting 
strawberries grown in the Netherlands had 
higher yields without shading (Wagstaffe and Battey 
2004), but once-fruiting strawberries grown in Nova 
Scotia had higher yields under moderately reduced 
light (Li et al. 2010), indicating that there is a range 
of light levels optimum for yield. That optimum 
varies by strawberry type (e.g., some plants need 
short-day exposure to flower, while others are neutral 
to day length, i.e., day neutral) and even cultivar. 
Highest marketable tomato yields were produced 
under 50% shading (Gent 2007). In potato, the 
amount of light was more important than temperature 
or photoperiod in explaining differences between 
spring and autumn seasonal yields (Bisognin et al. 
2008). The amount of light received is positively 
correlated with lettuce plant growth (Grazia et al. 
2001), but too much light, or rather, too much light 
of the wrong wavelength, can cause problems with 
quality (Wissemeier and Zuhlke 2002; Frantz et al. 
2004). Research has shown that maximum yield 
and quality can be achieved in protected cultivation 
(Oliveira et al. 2006). Cracked skin was the tomato 
defect most alleviated by shade (Gent 2007). Too 
much light can also reduce strawberry fruit quality; 
for example, high light and temperature levels lead 
to the development of strawberry fruit bronzing 
(damaged fruit that is bronze in color and may be 
desiccated or cracked on the surface) in Commander, 
a particularly susceptible cultivar (Larson et al. 
2005). Tomato plants grown in 25%-27% reduced 
light tolerate and can even achieve higher yields in 
higher temperatures (Pino et al. 2002; Uzun 2007). 

Interactions Across Climate Change Stressors 

Because plants continuously integrate myriad environmental 
signals, tolerance to increased temperature 
is often dependent on the status of other environmental 
factors like humidity and light. It has been 
worthwhile to identify specific cultivar responses 
to interaction effects in various crops (Amadi 2009; 
Santos et al. 2009). Examples from tomato highlight 
plant responses to these interactions. Under 
high light conditions, tomato fruit yield reached 
maximum levels at 22C, and under reduced light 
conditions, yield continued to increase to 25C, so 
that reducing light increased tolerance to higher 
temperatures (Uzun 2007). A study by Peet et al. 

Chapter 5 


(2003) demonstrated that plants were more sensitive 
to the combination of high heat and humidity than to 
either condition alone; reducing humidity increased 
tolerance to higher temperatures, and some cultivars 
performed better than others under both high humidity 
and heat. Onions grown at increased temperature 
hastened leaf expansion regardless of atmospheric 
CO2 concentrations. However, increased CO2 at high 
temperature led to the selective increase of carbohydrates 
in bulbs but not leaves (Wheeler et al. 2004). 
These interactions will become important when considering 
adaptation of crop production via relocation 
of agricultural activity. 

Adaptation 

For an individual crop, there are often cultivars with 
higher tolerances for stressful temperatures, water 
availability, light, and other environmental factors, 
just as there are cultivars that are resistant or susceptible 
to certain diseases. Studies of specialty crops 
have identified promising sources of heat-tolerant 
genetic material (Camejo et al. 2005; Harbut et al. 
2010). This is important because borrowing superior 
stress tolerance mechanisms from overall inferior 
plants is a crucial way to improve the varieties that 
are grown every day in commercial production. At 
least one promising source of heat tolerance was 
identified when assessing cultivars of strawberry 
(Ledesma and Sugiyama 2005; Ledesma et al. 2008), 
tomato (Sato et al. 2000; Sato et al. 2004), lettuce 
(Santos et al. 2009), onion (Tesfaendrias et al. 2010), 
and potato (Amadi 2009). Cultivar differences in 
tolerance to temperature extremes appear to be 
greater than for any other environmental stressor. 
This highlights plant breeding as an important tool 
for adapting agriculture to future climate change. 

Perennial Specialty Crops 

Perennial specialty crop production is sensitive 
to temperature, water availability, solar radiation, 
air pollution, and CO2. Furthermore, as in other 
C3 plants, photosynthesis can be limited by CO2 
availability when light and other factors are 
not limiting (Farquhar et al. 1980). Increased 
atmospheric CO2 generally increases growth rate and 
yield, resulting in a higher accumulation of biomass, 
fruit production, and quality in fruit trees (Idso and 
Kimball 1997; Centritto et al. 1999a; Kimball et al. 
2007). However, growth enhancements in response 
to increasing CO2 could diminish in the long-term 
due to acclimation, especially when combined with 
other limiting factors such as heat stress and nutrient 
deficiencies (Pan et al. 1998; Druta 2001; Vu et al. 
2002; Adam et al. 2004). 

The value of perennial specialty crops is derived 
from not only the tonnage but also the quality of the 
harvested product, for example the size of a peach, 
the red blush on an apple, or the bouquet of a red 
wine produced from a particular vineyard. In contrast 
to annual agronomic crop production, perennial crop 
production is not easily moved as the climatic nature 
of a region declines due to many socio-economic 
factors including long re-establishment periods, 
nearness to processing plants, availability of labor, 
and accessible markets. Climate change complicates 
the problem of food production from perennial crops. 

Temperature Effects 

In California, the optimum growing temperature 
for wine and table grapes, oranges, walnuts, and 
avocados is equivalent to the average temperature 
from 1980-2003, indicating that the current cultivars 
are well adapted to the contemporary California 
temperature regime (Lobell et al. 2006). Perennial 
cropping systems are commonly in place as long as 
30 years, and this poses a challenge with a changing 
climate since the selection of a productive cultivar 
at planting may not be the most adapted sometime 
in the future. The development of new cultivars in 
perennial specialty crops commonly requires 15 to 
30 or more years, greatly limiting the opportunity to 
easily shift cultivars. 

In addition to the rise in global temperature, it is 
expected that some extreme events will increase in 
frequency and severity as a result of the shift in mean 
conditions and/or a change in climate variability 
(Easterling et al. 2002; McCarthy et al. 2001). These 
extreme events and climatic variation will also pose 
additional challenges to perennial cropping systems. 
Socio-economic factors and inability to rapidly identify 
adapted cultivars do not necessarily make the 
perennial specialty cropping systems more vulnerable 
to climate change, but they do call attention to 
the needs of the industry for new cultural and genetic 
tools and research to adapt in a timely and economic 
manner. 

The value of a fruit crop is determined and limited at 
many points before and during the growing season 
because the value is based not only on biomass, 
but on size, color, chemical composition, firmness, 
and other measurable criteria. Using apple as an 
example, in the year prior to harvest, floral initiation 
occurs in June-July and high temperatures reduce the 
number and vigor of the potential floral buds. During 
the dormant winter months, extreme cold can kill 
buds and warming periods can de-acclimate buds, 
making them susceptible to later winter damage. 

Chapter 5 

In California, the optimum 
growing temperature for 
wine and table grapes, 
oranges, walnuts, and 
avocados is equivalent to 
the average temperature 
from 1980-2003, indicating 
that the current cultivars 
are well adapted to the 
contemporary California 
temperature regime. 


In the spring, frost periods can kill flowers. As the 
fruit are growing in the spring, high temperature 
can reduce cell division resulting in small fruit. 
During the summer months, high temperature may 
cause sunburn damage reducing pack-out at harvest, 
accelerate maturity, reduce fruit firmness and color 
development, and/or decrease the suitability of fruit 
for short- or long-term storage. 

Of the many perennial specialty crops produced in 
the United States, apple, blueberry, cherry, citrus, 
grape, peach, pear, raspberry, and red maple were 
selected as representative perennial nursery and 
ornamental crops. Critical temperature and photosynthetically 
active radiation (PAR) thresholds for key 
phenological stages were identified in the scientific 
literature (Tables 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, and 5.6). Each crop 
has a range of cultivars, and so there is a range 
of critical thresholds for the various phenological 
stages. Conservative thresholds were selected from 
the literature for use by crop/climate modelers and 
policy makers in assessing future climate change 
effects. The response of these crops to a proposed 
doubling of atmospheric CO2 is evaluated from the 
scientific literature in Tables 5.7, 5.8, 5.9. 

Modeling of past and future climate changes in the 
United States has demonstrated that warming in 
the historical record and future warming will affect 
perennial specialty cropping systems. Historically, 
apple mid-bloom dates in the Northeastern United 
States have advanced 0.20 days/year (Wolfe et al. 
2005), with a temperature rise of 0.25C/decade 
(Hayhoe et al. 2007). According to Stckle et al. 
(2010), apple bloom will occur approximately 3 days 
earlier by 2020 in eastern Washington. From 1948 to 
2002 in the main grape growing regions of California, 
Oregon, and Washington, growing seasons 
have warmed by 0.9C (Jones et al. 2005). In future 
climate scenarios, grape bloom time in the central 

Chapter 5 

Table 5.3. Critical temperature thresholds for the production of apple, blueberry and cherry at various phenological stages. 

Phenological stage Apple Blueberry Cherry 
Winter hardiness/chill 
accumulation(
chillunits) 
400-2900; 5 or 7C base. (Swartz and Powell, 1981; Hauagge, 
2010) 
600-1200; 4C base 
(Arora et al., 1997) 
900-1500; 7C base (Seif and 
Gruppe, 1985) 
Freezesusceptibilityofflowers 
-3 to -4C (Powell and David, 2011) -2C (Powell and 
David, 2011; Snyder 
and Melo-Abreu, 
2005) 
-2C (Snyder and Melo- 
Abreu, 2005) 
Pre-bloomflowerdevelopment/
floralinitiation 
>5C prebloom detrimental to fruit set; >17C reduces floral 
initiation; Elevated fall temperatures delay bloom up to 3 
days. (Warrington et al., 1999; Tromp, 1976; Jackson et al., 
1983; Tromp and Borsboom, 1994; Wilkie et al., 2008) 
>28C reduces initiation 
in highbush. 
(Darnell and Williamson, 
1997) 
30-35C during initiation 
results in doubles. (Beppu 
et al., 2001; 
Effectsonpollination 
High temperatures increase pollen tube growth but decrease 
stigma and ovule viability and converse with low temperature. 
In general, O. cornuta was active from 10 to 12C and 200 
w/m2, and A. mellifera from 12 to 14C and 300 w/m2. (Vicens 
and Bosch. 2000; Way, 1995; Sanzol and Herrero. 2001) 
Honey bee activity 
increased linearly 
from 18-28C. 
(Danka and Beaman, 
2007) 
>5C reduces ovule viability. 
An increase in temperature 
reduced pollen germination, 
but accelerated pollen tube 
growth. (Beppu et al., 1997; 
Hedhly et al., 2004; Postweiler 
et al., 1985) 
Fruitset/
fruitdrop 
Temperatures >13C increase fruit drop. (Grauslund, 1978) Nd Increasing daily mean 3C 
above norm decreased fruit 
set. Optimal temperature 
is ~15C during flower 
development. (Beppu et al., 
1997; Hedhly et al., 2004) 
Chemical thinning Temperatures >25C can result in excessive fruit thinning. 
Temperatures > 27C overthin. Temperatures < 18C are ineffective. 
Thinning increased linearly from 8-24C with an ideal 
range of 21-24C. (Wertheim, 2000; Yuan, 2007; Stover and 
Greene, 2005; Forshey, 1976; Buban, 2000) 
not a standard 
cultural practice 
Thinning increases linearly 
from 16-20C. (Olien and 
Bukovac, 1978) 
Maturity/harvesting Maximum volatile production occurs at 22C during ripening. 
Increasing air temp 40-80 days after bloom linearly increases 
fruit size and soluble solids but decreases firmness. Temperatures 
>20C reduces anthocyanin production. Fruit surface 
temperatures > 45C induce sunburn. (Barber and Shape, 
1971; Felicetti and Schrader, 2008; Warrington et al., 1999; 
Dixon and Hewett, 2000; Lin-Wang et al., 2011; McArtney et 
al., 2011) 
Night temperatures 
> 21C decrease 
fruit size. Day 
temperatures >29C 
decrease size. 
(Darnell and Williamson, 
1997) 
Bruising decreases linearly 
with increasing temperature 
above 0C. (Crisosto et al., 
1993) 
Chapter 5 

Table 5.4. Critical temperature thresholds for the production of citrus, grape and maple at various phenological stages. 

Phenological stage Citrus Grape Maple 
Winter hardiness/chill 
accumulation(
chillunits) 
not generally thought to 
need chilling 
90-1400 ; 4C budbreak; 7C base leaf appearance. (Moncur 
et al., 1989; Reginato et al., 2010) 
1000-1200; 
7C base 
(Wilson et al., 
2002) 
Freezesusceptibilityofflowers 
-2 to -3C (Snyder and Melo- 
Abreu, 2005) 
-1C (Snyder and Melo-Abreu, 2005) nd 
Pre-bloomflowerdevelopment/
floralinitiation 
5 weeks of 10C day or 
night required for initiation; 
Hardening -4/8C (min/max); 
pre-bloom 0/14C; flowering 
10/27C with daily mean 
>20C to begin. (Bustan et 
al., 1996; Iglesias et al., 2007; 
Cole and McLeod, 1985; 
Moss, 1976) 
High temperature pulse of 20-30C previous year during 
stage 5-7 is required for initiation. (Srinivasan and Mullins, 
1980; Caprio and Quamme, 2002 
nd 
Effectsonpollination 
High temperatures < pollination 
period. Low temperatures 
> time for pollination. 
(Iglesias et al., 2007) 
12/9C and 15/10C (day/ night) reduced pollen growth 
and ovule viability. (COOMBE and MAY 1995; Srinivasan 
and Mullins, 1980) 
nd 
Fruitset/
fruitdrop 
Temperatures >30C increased 
fruit drop; optimum 
range 22/27C (min/max). 
Iglesias et al., 2007; Cole and 
McLeod, 1985; Bustan et al., 
1996) 
Temperatures 26C were associated with good production, 
probably because warm temperatures are required 
for flower bud initiation and development. (Caprio and 
Quamme, 2002). 
nd 
Chemical thinning Temperatures >30C removes 
excessive fruit. (Guardiola 
Garca-Luis, 2000) 
not a standard cultural practice not a standard 
cultural 
practice 
Maturity/harvesting Brix and acid decline with increasing 
effective heat units 
with the optimum range of 
13 to 27C; > 33C reduces 
size; high temperatures can 
lead to re-greening. (Bustan 
et al., 1996; Iglesias et al., 
2007; Hutton and Landsberg, 
2000; 
Temperatures>36C reduce production. 14.016.0C 
best range for Pinot Noir. 16.519.5C best temperature 
range for Cabernet Sauvignon best. Temperatures >35C 
decreases anthocyanins in Cabernet Sauvignon. 15C is 
optimal for color and anthocyanin development. Acidity 
can be halved with 10C increase in temperature and variation 
in maturity increases with temperature. (Jones et al. 
2005; Diffenbaugh et al., 2011; Jones, 2005; Lobell et al., 
2006; Jones and Goodrich, 2008; Poudel et al., 2009; Mori 
et al., 2007; Woolf and Ferguson, 2000; Spayd et al., 2002; 
Caprio and Quamme, 2002) 
Table 5.5. Critical temperature thresholds for the production of peach, pear and raspberry at various phenological stages. 

Crop Phenological stage 
Pre-bloom flower development/floral initiation Chemical thinning Fruit 
Apple <30% full sun reduces floral initiation. (Wilkie 
et al., 2008) 
3 days of cloudy weather greatly 
increase thinning at optimal temperature. 
(Stover and Greene, 2005) 
> 1200 mmol/m2/s with fruit 
surface temperature > 45C. 
(Chen et al., 2008) 
Blueberry nd not a standard cultural practice 
Cherry >20% full sun needed. (Flore and Layne, 1999) not a standard cultural practice 
Citrus 750-1000 mmol/m2/s are required in the canopy 
for floral initiation. (Germana et al., 2003) 
not a standard cultural practice 
Grape 10 hr of full sun/day in florescence development 
period. (Srinivasan and Mullins, 1981) 
not a standard cultural practice 
Maple not a standard cultural practice 
Peach nd < 23% full sun reduced color 
and soluble solids content. 
(Marini et al., 1999) 
Pear >30% full sun needed. (Wertheim, 2000) nd 
Raspberry nd not a standard cultural practice 
valley of California declines 0.08 to 0.169 days/year 
(Gutierrez et al. 2006). Results of citrus production 
simulations without CO2-induced response (Rosenzweig 
et al. 1996; Tubiello et al. 2002) indicate that 
production may shift slightly northward in the Southern 
States due to reduced frost frequency. 

Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

Experimental studies on perennial specialty crops 
have reported a sustained stimulation of photosynthesis 
and growth under elevated CO2 similar to the 
findings from forest tree species (Curtis and Wang 
1998) grown in open-top chambers (Norby et al. 
1999) or FACE systems (Ainsworth and Long 2005). 
For example, leaf area-based net CO2 assimilation 
at saturating light and growth was enhanced by an 
average of 44% in select fruit crops (Tables 5.7, 5.8, 
5.9). Some of these crops have exhibited detectable 
reductions in photosynthetic rates (e.g., apple, citrus), 
while others show mixed (e.g., cherry) or little acclimation 
(e.g., grape, peach). Stomatal conductance 
to water vapor in general was reduced in these crops 
grown at elevated CO2 by an average of 23%, which 
is similar to reported tree response in forest ecosystems 
(Medlyn et al. 2001). This increased assimilation 
under elevated CO2 resulted in a considerable 
increase in leaf water-use efficiency (58%). A similar 
response was reported at the crop-level water-use 
efficiency in several crops (i.e., cherry, citrus, and 
peach) (Tables 5.7, 5.8, 5.9). However, despite a 
considerable increase in water-use efficiency at both 
leaf and crop levels, the actual amount of crop water 
use remained similar. This is likely because of an 
increase in tree leaf area in response to elevated CO2. 

On average, above-ground biomass increased by 
60% in elevated CO2 across the crops reviewed here. 
On the other hand, root-to-shoot ratio remained similar 
in apple (Chen et al. 2002) and citrus (Kimball 
et al. 2007), and slightly increased in cherry (Druta 
2001). A rapid increase in tree leaf area during the 
early season accelerates early growth and biomass 
accumulation, especially in open canopies (referred 
to as compound interest effect by some) (Norby 
et al. 1999; Krner 2006). However, this accelerated 
growth response, such as shown in apple (Chen 
et al. 2001) and cherry (Centritto et al. 1999a), 
is likely to be less pronounced in a dense closed 
canopy in which the leaf area index (LAI) is more 
or less stable, so that competition for light and 
other resources are high (Norby et al. 1999). This is 
particularly true for natural systems where belowground 
resources such as nutrients, soil moisture, and 
space are major limiting factors. 

It has been suggested that long-term, natural 
responses to increasing CO2 are likely to be less drastic 
than what has been reported in short-term experiments 
where plant-soil and/or plant-atmosphere 
connection have been decoupled (Krner 2006). 
However, many orchard and other perennial specialty 
cropping systems are highly managed with ample 
fertilization, irrigation, spacing, canopy management, 
thinning and pruning, and other cultural practices to 
realize high yield and produce quality. With relatively 
larger sinks for carbohydrates (e.g., fruit load 
and wood formation) than annual field crops, it is 
conceivable that initial stimulation of high CO2 is 
sustained and in some cases amplified in perennial 

Chapter 5 


Table 5.6. Solar radiation thresholds of perennial specialty crops at various phenological stages. 

Crop Phenological stage 
Pre-bloom flower development/floral initiation Chemical thinning Fruit 
Apple <30% full sun reduces floral initiation. (Wilkie 
et al., 2008) 
3 days of cloudy weather greatly 
increase thinning at optimal temperature. 
(Stover and Greene, 2005) 
> 1200 mmol/m2/s with fruit 
surface temperature > 45C. 
(Chen et al., 2008) 
Blueberry nd not a standard cultural practice 
Cherry >20% full sun needed. (Flore and Layne, 1999) not a standard cultural practice 
Citrus 750-1000 mmol/m2/s are required in the canopy 
for floral initiation. (Germana et al., 2003) 
not a standard cultural practice 
Grape 10 hr of full sun/day in florescence development 
period. (Srinivasan and Mullins, 1981) 
not a standard cultural practice 
Maple not a standard cultural practice 
Peach nd < 23% full sun reduced color 
and soluble solids content. 
(Marini et al., 1999) 
Pear >30% full sun needed. (Wertheim, 2000) nd 
Raspberry nd not a standard cultural practice 
specialty crops. One such case study is a long-term 
CO2 enrichment experiment on citrus that ran for 17 
years in Maricopa, Arizona, in which the enhancement 
in biomass accumulation under elevated CO2 
was sustained at 70% after a peak stimulation occurring 
in only 2 to 4 years (Kimball et al. 2007). A less 
dramatic but still consistent and considerable CO2 
stimulation has been also observed in citrus grown 
using open-top chambers in humid Florida (Allen 
and Vu 2009). 

While multiple studies examined biomass and allocation 
response to elevated CO2, few studies report 
fruit yield response (Idso and Kimball 1997; Bindi 
et al. 2001; Ito et al. 2002). Even fewer studies have 
addressed the effects of elevated CO2 on produce and 
product quality with the exception of wine grapes 
(Bindi et al. 2001; Goncalves et al. 2009; de Orduna 
2010). Produce and product quality measures are 
likely to reflect different biochemical and physiological 
pathways of interactions between CO2, nutrients 

Chapter 5 

Table 5.7. Physiological response of apple, blueberry, and cherry to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 

Physiological parameter Apple Blueberry Cherry 
Leaf Amax +39% (Ro et al., 2001) -19% (Atkinson et al., 1997) 
Canopy photosynthesis +100% (Pan et al., 1998) 
Photosynthetic acclimation Down-regulation (Chen 
et al., 2001; Chen et al., 
2002a; Druta, 2001; Pan 
et al., 1998) 
No change (Centritto, 2005); 
Down-regulation (Druta, 2001), (Centritto et al., 1999c) 
(Atkinson et al., 1997) (Wilkins et al., 1994) 
Stomatal conductance Down (Centritto et al., 1999c) 
-52.5% (Atkinson et al., 1997) 
Stomatal density No change (Centritto et al., 1999c) 
Leaf transpiration -27~33% (Chen et al., 
2001) 
Down (Centritto et al., 1999b) 
Down -49% (Atkinson et al., 1997) 
Crop water use +13-16% (Chen et al., 
2002c) 
No change (-5.3%) (Centritto et al., 1999b) 
Leaf water use efficiency (WUE) Up 66% Atkinson et al., 1997) 
Crop WUE Up 47% (Centritto et al., 1999b) 
Leaf area +64% (55.3~73%) 
(Chen et al., 2002c) 
+25% (Centritto et al., 1999b) 
+27% after 10 mon (Atkinson et al., 1997) 
Leaf temperature 
Biomass +81% 
(Chen et al., 2002a) 
+20% (Druta, 2001) 
+40% (Centritto et al., 1999a) 
Yield 
Leaf chemistry (Non structural 
carbon etc.) 
+40% Starch, sucrose 
(Chen et al., 2002b) 
Sucrose, starch increased 
(Pan et al., 1998) 
Leaf sucrose increased, 
sorbitol decreased, Phloridzin 
decreased, (Kelm 
et al., 2005) 
No change except a reduction of [fructose] in leaf and 
root (Centritto, 2005) 
Starch increased (Centritto et al., 1999c) 
Root/shoot No change (Chen et al., 
2002a) 
increase (Druta, 2001) 
up (Centritto et al., 1999b) 
Leaf [N] Down. Reduction depends on DOY (Centritto et al., 1999c) 
Interaction with N No response in low N, positive response in adequate N 
(Wilkins et al., 1994) 
Interaction with salinity 
Fruit quality NA 
Interactions with mycorrhizae 
Interactions with pest damage 
Development Accelerated (Chen et al., 
2001) 
Accelerated (Centritto et al., 1999a) 
Chapter 5 

Table 5.8. Physiological response of citrus, grape and maple to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 

Crop Citrus Grape Maple 
Leaf Amax +45% (Adam et al., 2004) 
+39% (Vu et al., 2002) 
+34% (Mouthinho- 
Pereira et al., 2009) 
+59% at 200ppm + (Deluca and Thomas, 
2000) 
+69% (Groninger et al., 1996) 
+68% (Kubiske and Pregitzer, 1996) 
Canopy photosynthesis 
+93% average of two temps (Brakke and 
Allen, 1995) (Baker and Allen Jr, 1993) 
Photosynthetic 
acclimation 
(+, 0, ) 
Down-regulation, -25% (Adam et al., 2004) 
Down-regulation with Rubisco down (Vu et 
al., 2002) 
Down-regulation (Keutgen and Chen, 2001) 
No change 
(Mouthinho-Pereira 
et al., 2009) 
Stomatal 
conductance 
+33% (Adam et al., 2004) 
-28% (Vu et al., 2002) 
-15% (Mouthinho- 
Pereira et al., 2009) 
-28.5% (McElrone et al., 2005) 
(Bunce, 1992) 
Stomataldensity 
No change (Estiarte et al., 1994) -18.6% (Mouthin ho- 
Pereira et al., 2009) 
No change (McElrone et al., 2005) 
Leaftranspiration 
+26% Arizona FACE (Adam et al., 2004) 
-31% (Vu et al., 2002) 
-12% (ns) (Mouthinho- 
Pereira et al., 2009) 
Crop water use -30% avg of two temps (Baker and Allen Jr, 
1993) 
Leaf water use 
efficiency(
WUE) 
Up 76% (Vu et al., 2002) 
+14.7% (Adam et al., 2004) 
Up 69.4%( Mouthinho- 
Pereira et al., 2009) 
CropWUE 
Up 80% (Leavitt et al., 2003) 
Leaf area +12% (Kimball et al., 2007) 
Leaf temperature 
Biomass +27% total biomass (2 yrs, chamber) (Allen 
and Vu, 2009) 
+70% total biomass (17 yrs, FACE) (Kimball 
et al., 2007) 
+78%, wood biomass (Adam et al., 2004) 
+45~50% (Bindi et al., 
2001) 
+51~92% (Norby et al., 2000) 
No response after 1 yr (Edwards and 
Norby, 1999) 
+33.8% greenhouse study (Groninger et 
al., 1996) 
Yield Fruit number (more than doubled after 
6 years) and volume increased (Idso and 
Kimball, 1997) 
+42.5% (Mouthinho- 
Pereira et al., 2009) 
+45~45% (Bindi et al., 
2001) 
Leafchemistry(
Nonstructuralcarbonetc.) 
+166% (Vu et al., 2002) +14% [sugar] (Bindi 
et al., 2001) 
C/N ratio up (+20%) Phenolics (-15%) 
Tannins (-14%) (McElrone et al., 2005) 
Soluble C up (+38.9%) (Bauer et al., 2001) 
TNC/N up by 31% (Williams et al., 2000) 
Root/shoot No change (Kimball et al., 2007) 
Leaf [N] -11% (Adam et al., 2004) 
-18.5% (Keutgen and Chen, 2001) 
-10% in initial years (Penuelas et al., 1997) 
No change after 17 years (Kimball et al., 
2007) 
-9.3% (Mouthinho- 
Pereira et al., 2009) 
-20% (McElrone et al., 2005) 
Reduction (Bauer et al., 2001) 
-14.5% (Williams et al., 2000) 
-25% (Norby et al., 2000) 
InteractionwithN 
No change (Kimball et al., 2007) 
Interactionwithsalinity 
(Garcia-Sanchez and Syversten, 2006) 
Fruit quality No change in wine 
quality (De Orduna, 
2010) 
No difference in wine 
quality (Bindi et al., 
2001) 
Berry and wine quality 
unaffected (Goncalves 
et al., 2009) 
Interactionswithmycorrhizae 
CO2 effect became more beneficial with AM 
(Syversten and Graham, 1999) 
Interactionswithpestdamage 
Reduced (-19%) foliar disease (McElrone 
et al., 2005) 
Gypsy moth growth decline by 39% (Williams 
et al., 2000) 
Development 
(N in particular), temperature, and pest damage. 
Several studies have examined leaf chemistry of fruit 
trees grown in elevated CO2 (Centritto et al. 1999b; 
Centritto 2002; Adam et al. 2004; Moutinho-Pereira 
et al. 2009). In these studies, leaves grown under 
elevated CO2 had about 15% lower nitrogen concentration 
on average. Similarly, significant increases in 
leaf sucrose, starch, and overall carbon-to-nitrogen 
ratio have also been found in several studies (Pan 
et al. 1998; Chen et al. 2002; Vu, Joseph C. V. et al. 
2002; McElrone et al. 2005). 

In summary, perennial specialty crops exhibit physiological 
and growth response that are similar to trees 
in forest and other unmanaged ecosystems. The CO2 
fertilization effect may be amplified and sustained 
longer for perennial specialty crops if (1) other 
resources (e.g., nutrients and water availability) are 
amply supplied, and (2) proper management options 
(e.g., spacing, pruning, thinning) are practiced 
to facilitate the positive CO2 effects by balancing 
source-sink relations for carbohydrates. This 
will likely require maintaining intensive cropping 
systems. In addition, the positive CO2 effect may be 
negated by the detrimental effects of extreme temperatures 
on phenology, carbon sinks, and reproductive 
physiology. 

Ozone Effects 

As reviewed by Fuhrer (2009), when elevated ozone 
is combined with elevated CO2, yield loss is typically 
considerably less than with ozone alone. The 
protective effect of CO2 is primarily due to reduced 
stomatal conductance reducing ozone flux into the 
leaf, and this mechanism is associated with elevated 
CO2. Consequently, ozone can also diminish the 
stimulating effect on yield of elevated CO2, and the 
CO2 protection from ozone effects also becomes less 
effective with increasing temperature. 

Chapter 5 

Table 5.9. Physiological response of peach, pear and raspberry to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 

Physiological parameter Peach Pear Raspberry 
Leaf Amax +58.5% well water, OTC (Centritto et al., 
2002) 
+88% estimated from Fig. 1 (Ito et 
al., 2002) 
Canopy photosynthesis 
Photosynthetic acclimation 
(+, 0, -) 
No down regulation (Centritto, 2002) 
Stomatal conductance No change (Centritto et al., 2002) Reduced (Ito et al., 2002) 
Stomatal density 
Leaf transpiration No change (Centritto et al., 2002) 
Crop water use 
Leaf water use efficiency (WUE) Up 51% (Centritto et al., 2002) 
Crop WUE Up 57% (Centritto et al., 2002) Increased (Ito et al., 2002) 
Leaf area No change, +3.7% (Centritto et al., 2002) No change (Ito et al., 2002) 
Leaf temperature 
Biomass +33% (Centritto et al., 2002) Stem biomass increased (Ito et al., 
2002) 
+115% (Martin and 
Johnson, 2011) 
Yield Fruit size increased (Ito et al., 2002) 
Leaf chemistry (Non structural 
carbon etc.) 
Root/shoot 
Leaf [N] -16.5% (Centritto et al., 2002) 
Interaction with N 
Interaction with salinity 
Fruit quality 
Interactions with mycorrhizae 
Interactions with pest damage Variable interactions with aphids 
depending on genetic susceptibility 
(Martin and Johnson, 2011) 
Development 
Solar Radiation Effects 

Perennial specialty cropping systems require high 
light intensity and light quality for both biomass production 
and fruit quality (Jackson 1980; Dokoozlian 
and Kliewer 1996). Pruning and training systems 
optimize light interception and distribution within 
the canopy to increase fruit quality. Excessive light 
can result in solar damage/sunburn, while insufficient 
light can reduce fruit bud formation, color development, 
soluble solids development, and fruit size 
(Table 5.6). 

Disease 

In eastern Washington State, a cherry powdery 
mildew is predicted to increase under the Community 
Climate System Model, version 3 (CCSM3; 
2020 only) and the Coupled Global Climate Model, 
version 3 (CGCM3) climate projections (Stckle et 
al. 2010). There will be small increases or no change 
in the risk from grapevine powdery mildew for all 
climate projections. Overall, warmer climate, but 
with small changes in precipitation during the growing 
season, tends to maintain and eventually reduce 
the incidence of these diseases, unless an increase 
in precipitation occurs early in the growing season 
(Stckle et al. 2010). 

In the Northeastern United States, the projected 
increase in short- to medium-term drought (Hayhoe 
et al. 2007) will tend to decrease the duration of leaf 
wetness and reduce some forms of pathogen attack 
on leaves. However, an increase in humidity and 
frequency of heavy rainfall events projected for the 
Northeast (Frumhoff et al. 2006) will tend to favor 
some leaf and root pathogens (Coakley et al. 1999), 
and the projected increased rainfall frequency (Frumhoff 
et al. 2006) may reduce the efficacy of contact 
fungicides, requiring more frequent applications. In 
forest ecosystems, maple is expected to have reduced 
(-19%) foliar disease (McElrone et al. 2005) with 
doubled CO2. 

Insects 

A warming trend is likely to lead to increased 
pesticide use in the Northeast due to earlier arrival 
of migratory insects, higher winter-time survival of 
insects that currently are only marginally adapted to 
the region, and more generations of insects within a 
single season (Wolfe et al. 2008). In addition, some 
classes of pesticides (pyrethroids and spinosad), key 
to protecting perennial specialty cropping systems, 
have been shown to be less effective in controlling 
insects at higher temperatures (Musser and Shelton 
2005). 

In addition to increasing numbers and viability of 
insects, climate change may jeopardize biological 
control successes. For example, in California, 
DeBach and Sundby (1963) introduced a series of 
parasitoid species to control California red scale 
on citrus. These releases resulted in a sequence of 
climatically adapted parasitoids displacing each other 
in some areas. This displacement occurred until each 
species established itself in the subset of Californian 
environments most favorable for its development. 
Similarly, extensive biological control efforts are 
underway to control the vine mealybug (VMB), 
a major pest of grape production in California 
(Gutierrez 2005). High VMB densities occur in 
northern regions and in coastal regions of southern 
California, while VMB is less abundant in dryer 
warmer regions. The distribution and abundance of 
VMBs natural enemies is patchy across the different 
grape growing regions. While sucess to date has been 
elusive, if biological control of VMB is established, 
climate change could adversely affect it by changing 
the climatic conditions of the area. As is the case 
with other ecosystems, a forest ecosystem FACE 
study shows leaf chemistry changes under elevated 
CO2 that have led to a decline in the growth rate of 
Gypsy moth larvae by 39%. Temperature, however, 
did not affect the growth or consumption rate by 
larvae in red maple (Williams et al. 2000). This result 
illustrates the complex linkage between direct and 
indirect effects of climate change on crops. 

Effects of Changing Water Constraints 

Increased drought frequency in the Northeast, 
together with warmer growing season temperatures 
will result in greater crop water requirements (Wolfe 
et al. 2008). Perennial specialty crops have reduced 
yield and quality in association with water deficits, 
and reduced profits as a result. While many producers 
of perennial specialty crops in the Northeast have 
some irrigation equipment, most have not invested in 
enough equipment to optimize irrigation scheduling 
and fully meet evapotranspiration requirements of all 
of their acreage (Wilks and Wolfe 1998). 

Elsner et al. (2010) simulated the hydrology of Washington 
State and the Yakima River Basin, projecting 
April 1 snow water equivalents (SWE) to decrease 
by 28% to 30% across the State by the 2020s, 38% 
to 46% by the 2040s, and 56% to 70% by the 2080s. 
In the Yakima Basin, April 1 SWE will decrease by 
35% to 37% by the 2020s, 47% to 57% by the 2040s, 
and 68% to 82% by the 2080s. The peak weekly 
SWE historically occurs near mid-March. Projections 
of weekly SWE for the 2020s indicate that SWE will 

Chapter 5 


be reduced by an average of 39% to 41%. The peak 
week is projected to shift to early or mid-March. By 
the 2040s, SWE will be reduced by 50% to 58% with 
a peak projected to occur near early March, and by 
67% to 80% by the 2080s with a peak projected to 
occur near mid-February. 

Similarly in California, Miller et al. (2003) simulated 
the hydrology for the Sacramento, American, 
and Merced Basins. SWE decreases for most basins, 
and the peak discharge is earlier for all basins by 
2080 to 2099. There is an early season increase in 
liquid water from 2010 to 2099, with earlier snowmelt 
seasons with a slower snow melt rate. Reductions 
in growing season irrigation water will greatly 
limit perennial specialty crop production in the arid 
and semi-arid production regions unless sufficient 
water is stored in reservoirs and made available for 
irrigation. Late season crops will feel this effect 
most because of the increased water-use later in the 
growing season due to higher temperatures. The 
effect on crop wateruse efficiency of elevated CO2 on 
select crops is outlined in Tables 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9. In 
general, water-use efficiency (i.e., biomass or yield 
per water use) in perennial specialty crops is likely 
to increase because of reduced stomatal conductance 
and growth stimulation under high CO2. However, 
overall water use in many crops is likely to remain 
similar or even increase as a result of corresponding 
increase in leaf area. 

In another regional analysis for the U.S. West Coast, 
Lobell et al. (2006) examined the effects of climate 
change on yields of perennial crops in California. 
The research combined output from numerous 
climate models with statistical crops models for 
almonds, walnuts, avocados, wine grapes, and 
table grapes. The results show a range of predicted 
temperature increases across climate models of 
approximately 1C to 3C for 2050, 2C to 6C for 
2100, and a range of changes in precipitation from 
-40% to +40% for both 2050 and 2100. Wine grapes 
showed the smallest yield declines compared to 
other crops, but showed substantial spatial shifts in 

Chapter 5 

Case Study of Grapes in the United States 

White et al. (2006) demonstrated that U.S. premium wine grape production area could decline up 
to 81% by the late 21st century.They found that increases in heat accumulation will likely shift wine 
production to warmer climate varieties and/or lower quality wines and that while frost constraints will 
be reduced, increases in the frequency of extreme hot days (>35C) in the growing season are projected 
to completely eliminate wine grape production in many areas of the United States.Grape and wine 
production will likely be restricted to a narrow West Coast region and the Northwest and Northeast  
areas where excess moisture is already problematic. Jones (2007) examined suitability for viticulture in 
the western United States, and contrived five regions broad suitability for viticulture across cool to hot 
climates, as well as the varieties that grow best in those regions. The cooler region (I) occurs at higher in 
elevation, and more coastal, and more northerly regions (e.g., the Willamette Valley), while the warmest 
region (V) areas are mostly confined to the Central Valley and further south in California (e.g., the San 
Joaquin Valley). Based on the historical record, 34% of the western United States falls into regions I-V, 
with 59% being too cold and 7% too hot. Region I encompasses 34.2%, Region II 20.8%, Region III 
11.1%, Region IV 8.7%, and Region V 25.2%. According to Jones (2007), using projections for average 
growing season temperatures from the Community Climate System Model (CCSM) of 1.0C to 3.0C 
for 2049 results in a range of increases in growing degree-days of 15% to 30%. For a 15% increase in 
growing degree days by 2049, the area of the western United States in Regions I-V increase from 34% 
to 39%, and at the higher range of a 25% increase in growing degree days, increases by 9% to 43%. 
Overall the changes show a reduction in the areas that are too cold from 59% to 41%, while the areas 
that are too hot increase from 7% to 16% in the greater warming scenario. Within the individual regions 
there are shifts to predominately more land in Region I (34.2% to 40.6%), smaller changes to Region 
II (20.8% to 23.4%), Region III (11.1% to 14.2%), and Region IV (8.7% to 10.1%), and a reduction of 
Region V area from 25.2% to 11.6%, which shifts the regions toward the coast, especially in California, 
and upwards in elevation (most notably in the Sierra Nevada Mountains). 


suitability to more coastal and northern counties. 
For oranges, walnuts, and avocados, not only are 
areas with the potential for high yields dramatically 
reduced, but the areas with appropriate climate tend 
to be in dry or mountainous regions with limited 
opportunities for agriculture. Less than 5 percent 
of simulations for almonds, table grapes, walnuts, 
and avocados indicated a zero or positive response 
to climate change by midcentury. Two main factors 
contribute to this result: (1) all of these crops are 
either at or above their optimum temperatures in 
current climate, and all climate models project at 
least some climate warming; and (2) all of these 
crops are irrigated, so precipitation projections have 
a relatively minor effect. The authors also note that 
historical increases in yield have low attribution 
to climate trends and were due more to changes in 
cultural and genetic technology. 

At a higher emissions scenario, within just the next 
few decades (20102039), a 5-to-10-day increase in 
the number of July heat stress days is projected for 
the southern half of the U.S. Northeast (i.e., much of 
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Connecticut, 
and southern New York). Under a lower emissions 
scenario, the climate change effect does not become 
substantial until midcentury (2040-2069). By the end 
of the century (20702099), with higher emissions, 
most days in July are projected to exceed the 32C 
heat stress threshold for most of the Northeast. Even 
assuming relatively lower emissions, much of the 
Northeast is projected to have 10 to 15 more days of 
heat stress in July by the end of the century, except 
for some northern areas (e.g., northern Maine and 
Vermont), where the increase is in the range of 5 
to 15 days. The projected increase in summer heat 
stress will be particularly detrimental to many cool 
temperature-adapted crops (e.g., apple) that currently 
dominate the Northeast agricultural economy. For 
many high value horticultural crops, very short term 
(hours or a few days), moderate heat stress at critical 
growth stages can reduce fruit quality by reducing 
visual or flavor quality even when total tonnage is 
not reduced (Peet and Wolfe. 2000). 

An increase in winter temperatures will affect the 
Northeast perennial specialty cropping systems. Midwinter 
warming can lead to early bud-burst or bloom 
of some perennial plants, resulting in frost damage 
when cold winter temperatures return. Yields will 
be negatively affected if the chilling requirement is 
not completely satisfied because flower emergence 
and viability will be low. All perennial specialty 
crops have a winter chilling requirement ranging 
from 200 to 2,000 cumulative hours. Wolfe et al. 
(2008) analyzed the future chill requirements of 
the Northeast and found that a 400-hour chilling 
requirement will continue to be met for most of 
the Northeast during this century regardless of 
emissions scenario. However, crops with prolonged 
cold requirements (1,000 or more hours) could 
be negatively affected, particularly in southern 
sections of the Northeast, and at the higher emissions 
scenario, where less than 50% of years satisfy the 
chill requirement by mid-21st century. The effect on 
crops will vary with species and variety since each 
species has a range of cultivars with widely varying 
chill requirements (Tables 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5). 

There is a historical trend for increased frequency 
of high-precipitation events (>5 cm in 48 h) (Wake 
2005) in the Northeast, and this trend is expected 
to continue with a further increase in the number of 
high-precipitation events of 8% by midcentury and 
12% to 13% by the end of the century (Frumhoff 
et al. 2006). More spring rainfall concentrated into 
high-precipitation events, combined with stable to 
modest reductions in summer and autumn rainfall 
and increased temperatures, leads to a projection 
for more short- (1- to 3-month) and medium-term 
(3- to 6-month) droughts for the region, particularly 
in the northern and eastern parts of the region 
(Frumhoff et al. 2006; Hayhoe et al. 2007). Drought 

Chapter 5 

Case Study of Apple Production 
in the Northeastern United States 

According to Wolfe et al. (2008), an extended 
frost-free period as projected for the Northeast 
(Frumhoff et al. 2006; Hayhoe et al. 2007) will 
tend to benefit perennial specialty cropping 
systems requiring a relatively long growing 
season such as apples, peaches, and grape 
varieties. However, projections for an increase 
in summer heat stress and drought can reduce 
yield and crop quality. In contrast, Wolfe et al. 
(2008) found that apple yields for western 
New York (19711982) were lower in years 
when winters were warmer than average 
(based on accumulated degree days >5C 
from January 1 to budbreak). This was likely 
related to more variable fruit set following 
warmer winters. Wolfe et al. (2008) compared 
projections of summer heat stress frequency 
(increase in number of days with maximum 
temperature exceeding 32C) for the increase 
in number of heat-stress days in the month of 
July at early-, mid-, and late-21st century. 


frequency is projected to be much greater at the 
higher Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) emissions scenario (A1F1), as compared to 
lower (B1) emissions scenario, according to Wolfe 
et al. (2008). By the end of the century and with 
higher emissions, short-term droughts are projected 
to occur as frequently as once per year for much of 
the Northeast, and occasional long-term droughts (>6 
month) are projected for western, upstate New York, 
where perennial specialty crops are a major industry 
(Wolfe et al. 2008). 

Adaptation 

Development of adapted cultivars is the long-term 
solution of perennial specialty cropping systems in 
a changing climate. There is wide variety of adapted 
cultivars that can be evaluated for new regions. 
Typical breeding programs require 10 to 30 years to 
confirm and improve a cultivar. Recent technology 
demonstrates how this breeding hurdle can be 
overcome using molecular approaches (Kean 2010; 
Srinivasan et al. 2010) to reduce perennial crop 
generation time to months instead of years. Since 
perennial specialty crops have a chill requirement 
(the minimum period of cold weather after which 
a fruit-bearing tree will blossom), it is necessary to 
induce and end dormancy at times in the growing 
season that minimize killing frosts both in spring and 
fall. This requires that the plant react to day length 
instead of temperature patterns. Research on possible 
adaptation focused on day length includes work done 
by Wisniewski et al. (2010), who transformed apple 
from temperature-induced dormancy to photoperiodinduced 
dormancy using a technology that may be 
adaptable for other perennial specialty crops. In 
addition to macroscale research, molecular biology 
is identifying genes associated with climate change 
(Hancock et al. 2011) that will benefit perennial 
specialty crops in the future. While projections of 
future climate indicate average warmer temperatures 
will affect crops, in todays environment, increased 
temperatures already reduce plant productivity. To 
deal with current temperature issues, technology 
such as application of reflective particle films (Glenn 
2009) has been developed and commercialized that 
reduces canopy and fruit temperature, increasing 
yield and quality in the face of increasing growingseason 
temperatures (Figure 5.2). 

In addition to these adaptations, perennial specialty 
crop growers have a wide assortment of management 
tools that will help them adjust to climate change. 
These include crop load adjustment, canopy pruning, 
irrigation, increased use of mechanization, and 
automation technology. As examples, overhead 
irrigation effectively reduces canopy temperature and 
is effective in frost mitigation although it is water-use 
inefficient, and the rotatable cross-arm trellis system 
of bramble production provides a cultural means 
to protect sugar cane from winter damage, frost 
damage, and sunburn damage by manipulating cane 
crop orientation (Takeda and Phillips 2011). 

Grazing Lands and Domestic Livestock 

The livestock industry makes a significant 
contribution to most rural economies. It accounts 
for 40% of the worlds agriculture Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) and in developing countries can 
account for as much as 80% of GDP (World Bank 
2007a, b). In the United States, the livestock industry 
has more than 1 million operations, with annual 

Chapter 5 


Case Study of Apple Production in the Pacific Northwest 

According to Stckle et al. 2009, climate change is predicted to slightly decrease the production of 
apples by 1%, 3%, and 4% for the 2020, 2040, and 2080 scenarios with no elevated CO2 effect. Under 
a warmer climate, crop development will proceed at a faster rate, reducing the opportunity for biomass 
gain. However, when the effect of elevated CO2 and warming is modeled, yields are projected to increase 
by 6%, 9%, and 16% for 2020, 2040, and 2080 scenarios compared to current levels, assuming the 
availability of varieties able to use the extended season or other adaptive technologies. Although 
average temperatures are projected to increase for all climate scenarios, the frequency of frost events 
may limit cropping due to earlier flowering. Under the projected climate change, flowering will occur 
about three days earlier in the 2020 scenario, which will slightly increase the frequency of frost events, 
increasing yield loss from frost damage or increase the need and expense for frost protection. Limited 
chill accumulation is not projected to limit apple production in eastern Washington. Water supply was 
assumed sufficient for irrigated crops, but other studies suggest that it may decrease in many locations 
due to climate change. 


sales totaling $153.6 billion according to the USDA 
National Agricultural Statistics Service. Livestock 
sales comprise 51.7% of all agricultural commodity 
sales. Total number of beef cattle, dairy, swine, and 
poultry in the United States, in millions of animals, 
are 96, 9, 68, and 9,560, respectively. 

Rtter and Van de Geijn (1999) suggest that shifts in 
climatic conditions could affect animal agriculture in 
four primary ways, through change in (1) feed-grain 
production, availability, and price, (2) pastures and 
forage crop production and quality, (3) animal health, 
growth, and reproduction, and (4) disease and pest 
distributions. The ensuing discussion focuses on the 
implications for livestock production systems and 
potential adaptive responses to climate change (such 
as the utilization of different species and genotypes 
of animals and forages), changes in facilities 
utilized for care and management of livestock, and a 
redistribution of livestock in a region (Gaughan et al. 
1999; Gaughan et al. 2009). 

Effect of Climate Change on Animal Productivity 

Livestock production occurs under a variety of 
management scenarios and environmental conditions. 
Livestock production systems that provide partial 
or total shelter to mitigate thermal environmental 
challenges can reduce the risk and vulnerability 
associated with adverse environmental events. In 
general, livestock such as poultry and swine are 
largely managed in housed systems where airflow 
can be controlled and housing temperature modified 
to minimize or buffer against adverse environmental 
conditions. In recent years, these industries 
have moved to utilizing more semi-controlled 
environmental systems to ameliorate production 
problems associated with changing and/or extreme 
environmental conditions. While shifts in these 
industries were made largely independent of climate 
change concerns, they can be adapted for use in an 
expected warmer future. However, despite modern 
heat-abatement strategies, summer-induced poor 
performance still costs the American swine industry 
more than $300 million annually (St-Pierre et al. 
2003). 

Greater concerns with regard to climate change 
are for animals managed in unsheltered and/or 
unbuffered environments. The majority of American 
domestic livestock managed in more extensive 
outdoor facilities are ruminants (goats, sheep, 
beef cattle, and dairy cattle). Within limits, these 
animals can adapt to and cope with most gradual 
thermal challenges. However, the rate at which 
environmental conditions are projected to change, 
the extent to which animals are exposed to extreme 
conditions, and the inability of animals to adequately 
adapt to sudden and/or dramatic environmental 
changes, are always a concern. Lack of prior 
conditioning to rapidly changing or adverse weather 
events most often results in catastrophic deaths in 
domestic livestock and losses of productivity in 

Chapter 5 

Case Study of Citrus in the United 
States 

Tubiello et al. (2002) simulated U.S. citrus 
production. Overall, yields increased 20-50%, 
while irrigation water use decreased. Crop loss 
due to freezing was 65% lower on average in 
2030 and 80% lower in 2090, at all sites. In 
the primary citrus production areas, Miami, 
FL, experienced the smallest increases, 6% 
to 15% and the other major production sites 
in Arizona, Texas, and California, increases 
were 20-30% in 2030 and 50% to 70% in 
2090. All sites experienced a decrease in crop 
loss from freezing. Potential for northward 
expansion of U.S. citrus production was 
small because results indicated that in 2030 
and 2090 northern sites of current marginal 
production would continue to have lower fruit 
yield, higher risk of crop loss due to freezing, 
and lower water availability than the southern 
sites. 

Fig. 5.2. Relationship between the percentage increase in mean 
fruit weight of particle film treated fruit of Empire apple compared 
to the control treatment and the mean growing season 
temperature from 1998-2007 at Kearneysville, West Virginia. 


surviving animals (Mader 2003). Animal phenotypic 
and genetic variation, management factors (facilities, 
stocking rates, and nutrition), physiological status 
(stage of pregnancy, stage of lactation, growth 
rate), age, and previous exposure to environmental 
conditions may exacerbate the effect of adverse 
environmental conditions. 

The optimal environmental conditions for livestock 
production are comprised of a range of temperatures 
and other environmental conditions for which 
the animal does not need to significantly alter 
behavior or physiological functions to maintain a 
relatively constant core body temperature. Ambient 
environmental conditions directly affect mechanisms 
and rates of heat gain or loss by all animals (NRC 
1981). In many species, 5oC to 7oC deviations 
from core body temperature can cause significant 
reductions in productive performance and may lead 
to death (Gaughan et al. 2009). 

As environmental conditions result in core body 
temperature approaching and/or moving outside 
normal diurnal boundaries, the animal must begin to 
conserve or dissipate heat to maintain homeostasis 
(Davis et al. 2003; Mader and Kreikemeier 2006). 
This is accomplished through shifts in short-term 
and long-term thermoregulatory processes (Gaughan 
et al. 2002a, b; Mader et al. 2007). The onset of 
a thermal challenge often results in declines in 
physical activity and an associated decline in eating 
and grazing (for ruminants and other herbivores) 
activity. In addition, environmental stress may 
affect hormonal changes that in turn result in shifts 
in cardiac output, redistribution of blood flow to 
extremities, altered metabolic rates, and slowed 
digesta passage rate. 

The risk potential associated with livestock 
production systems due to changing climatic 
conditions can be characterized by levels of 
vulnerability as influenced by animal performance 
and environmental parameters (Hahn et al. 2005). 
When performance level and environmental 
influences combine to create a low level of 
vulnerability, little risk exists. However, as 
performance levels decrease, the vulnerability of 
the animal increases. When coupled with an adverse 
environment, the animal is at greater risk. 

Inherent genetic characteristics or management 
scenarios that limit the animals ability to adapt to 
or cope with environmental change also puts the 
animal at risk. At very low performance levels, 
any environment other than near-optimal increases 
animal vulnerability. For example, the modern highproducing 
dairy cow begins to experience heat stress 
at a thermal heat index (THI) of 68, this is at least 
four THI units lower than was the case for cows 40 
years ago when environmental stresses were lower 
(Zimbleman et al. 2009). 

The potential effects of climate change on 
overall performance of domestic animals can be 
determined using defined relationships between 
climatic conditions and dry matter intake (DMI), 
climatological data, and General Circulation Model 
(GCM) output. Because ingestion of feed is directly 
related to heat production, any change in DMI 
and/or energy density or nutrient profile of the 
diet will change the amount of heat produced by 
the animal (Mader 2003; Mader and Davis 2004). 
Environmental conditions influence heat transfer by 
the animal; however, animals exposed to the same 
environmental conditions will not exhibit the same 
reduction in DMI. Body weight, body condition, and 
level of production also affect DMI; having a better 
understanding of what contributes to the variation 
in heat-induced DMI decrease is of obvious interest. 
In addition to reduced feed intake, heat stress also 
directly affects post-absorptive metabolism (Rhoads 
et al. 2009), which results in a reprioritization of 
nutrient utilization. This altered metabolic hierarchy 
and reduced nutrient intake primarily explains why 
animals produce less during the warm months. 

 

In the Central United States, a modeling exercise 
based on the Canadian Global Coupled Model (CGC) 
projections for 2040 and associated with changes 
in DMI (Frank et al. 2001; USDA 2008) indicate 
that days to slaughter-weight for swine increased 
by an average of 3.7 from the baseline of 61.2 days. 
Potential losses under this scenario averaged 6% 
and would cost swine producers in the region $12.4 
million annually. Losses associated with the Hadley 
scenario (United Kingdom Meteorological Office/ 
Hadley Center for Climate Prediction and Research) 
are less severe. Increased time to slaughter-weight 
averaged 1.5 days or 2.5%, costing producers $5 
million annually. 

For confined beef cattle reared in the Central 
United States, time-to-slaughter-weight associated 
with the CGC 2040 scenario increased by 4.8 days 
(above the 127-day baseline value) or 3.8%, costing 
producers $43.9 million, annually. Climate changes 
projected by the Hadley 2040 model resulted in a 
loss of 2.8 days of production or 2.2%. For dairy, the 
projected CGC 2040 climate scenario would result 
in a 2.2% (105.7 kg/cow) reduction in milk output 
and cost producers $28 million annually. Production 
losses associated with the Hadley scenarios would 
average 2.9% and cost producers $37 million 
annually. Across the entire United States, percent 

Chapter 5 


increase in days to market for swine and beef and 
the percent decrease in dairy milk production for 
the 2040 scenario averaged 1.2%, 2.0%, and 2.2%, 
respectively, using the CGC model, and 0.9%, 0.7%, 
and 2.1%, respectively, using the Hadley model. 
For the 2090 scenario, respective changes averaged 
13.1%, 6.9%, and 6.0%, using the CGC model, and 
4.3%, 3.4%, and 3.9%, using the Hadley model. For 
these scenarios it should be noted that production 
losses for the dairy sector were generally not as great 
as those found for beef and swine in the U.S. South 
and Southeast. 

Projected animal production responses based on a 
doubling (2040) and tripling (2090) of atmospheric 
greenhouse gas CO2 levels for the period June 1 to 
October 31 were obtained for the Central United 
States (Mader et al. 2009). For swine, a slight 
northwest (Montana) to southeast (Louisiana) 
gradient was evident. The west side (Montana to 
New Mexico) of the Central Plains showed few 
production losses with some benefits under the 
doubling CO2 scenario, however, losses up to 
22.4% were found under the tripling scenario. On 
the east side (Minnesota to Louisiana), few to no 
losses in productivity were found in the North, but 
losses between 40% and 70% were found in the 
South under the tripling scenario. For beef, small 
changes were found in the Western Plains with 
increasing temperatures, although a northwest to 
southeast gradient was also evident. Production 
losses never exceeded 20% for any location or 
under any scenario. For dairy, no positive benefits in 
milk production were found due to climate effects. 
Projected production declines ranged from 1% to 
7.2%, depending on location. However, ranges in 
predicted differences were less than those simulated 
for beef and swine. These simulations suggest that 
regional differences in animal production due to 
climate change will be apparent. For small changes 
in climatic conditions, animals will likely be able 
to adapt, while larger changes in climate conditions 
will likely dictate that management strategies be 
implemented. Exploration of the effects of climate 
change on livestock should allow producers to adjust 
management strategies to reduce potential effect and 
economic losses due to environmental changes. 

International studies may shed some light on what 
U.S. agricultural producers might expect from future 
climate changes. Seo and McCarl (2011) project that 
under the hotter and drier conditions anticipated for 
Australia, sheep would increase in number by 122%, 
beef cattle by 211%, dairy cattle by 29%, and pigs 
by 71%. On the other hand, sheep would increase 
by only 22% if summers become wetter. Livestock 
revenue is anticipated to increase by 47% by 2060. 
In the above analyses, a hotter and drier climate is 
beneficial for livestock because it is projected to 
alter the landscape from croplands to pasture suitable 
for livestock. At the same time, however, these 
changes could lead to reduced feed available from 
grain production, lower stocking rates on pasture, 
and reduced forage quality. In addition, a number of 
pastoral ecosystems in Australia are already marginal 
for livestock production, some of which would 
potentially become even less usable for grazing 
under projected changes in climate. 

In the United States, negative effects of hotter 
weather in summer likely will outweigh benefits of 
warmer winters (Adams et al. 1999). Thus, only a 
portion (estimated to be about 50%) of the declines 
in domestic livestock production during hotter 
summers can be offset by milder winter conditions. 
Climate change likely will affect high-producing 
animals more than low producers. However, positive 
winter effects will not offset summer declines in 
conception rates, particularly in cattle that breed 
primarily in spring and summer. Hahn (1995) 
reported that conception rates in dairy cows were 
reduced 4.6% for each unit change in the THI. 
Conception rates of Bos taurus cattle declined 
by more than 2 percent for each unit increase in 
THI, and by 1.5% to 3.8% for each degree Celsius 
increase in minimum temperature (Amundson et 
al. 2006). Animal productivity, body condition, 
geographical location, and seasonal breeding patterns 
also influence conception rates (Sprott et al. 2001). 

Effect of Climate Change on Grasslands 

The United States has nearly 480 million acres of 
range and pastureland. Approximately one-third of 
U.S. lands, or 777 million acres, are grazing lands. 
These include 614 million acres of grassland pasture 
and rangeland, 36 million acres of cropland pastures, 
and 127 million acres of forested rangelands 
(Nickerson et al. 2007). Grazing land acreage has 
steadily declined from 1,061 million acres in 1945 
when the USDA Economic Research Service began 
its major land use surveys. Loss of grazing lands 
occurs for a variety of reasons. Cropland pastures 
convert to croplands when commodity prices are 
high. Recreation, wildlife, and environmental 
applications have claimed many of these lands. 
Favorable weather can cause shifts toward forestry, 
especially in the South. Urbanization has resulted 
in substantial losses of grazing lands throughout the 
country. 

Grazing land changes differ notably by geography. 
For instance, non-forested grazing lands grew by 
28 million acres in the Southern Plains, and by 1 
million acres in the Southeast between 1949 and 

Chapter 5 

In the United States, 
negative effects of hotter 
weather in summer likely 
will outweigh benefits of 
warmer winters. 


2007, while decreases in large tracts of Federal 
lands for wilderness resulted in large reductions in 
grazing lands in the West. In general, climate change 
would add to the challenges and uncertainty posed 
by a growing population in the United States that 
is putting additional pressures and expectations on 
the goods and services expected from grazing lands 
(Morgan et al. 2008; Havstad et al. 2009). 

Temperature Effects 

Temperature exerts two basic, controlling effects 
on grazing-land ecology by regulating (1) rates of 
chemical reactions, and (2) exchanges of energy 
between the agroecosystem and the atmosphere, with 
water supply often modulating the influence of these 
temperature-driven effects. This is most pronounced 
for rangelands, where water is the primary ecological 
driver (Noy-Meir 1973; Sala et al. 1988). Thus, 
an understanding of the combined effects of rising 
temperature and changing precipitation patterns is 
necessary to forecast effects on grazing lands. 

Results from recent warming and observational 
experiments support earlier work (Dukes et al. 2005; 
Klein et al. 2007) indicating that compensating 
effects of temperature result in earlier spring 
green-up (Cleland et al. 2006; Sherry et al. 
2007; Hovenden et al. 2008), increased nitrogen 
mineralization (Luo et al. 2009), and higher earlyseason 
growth rates with more severe mid- and lateseason 
desiccation (Cleland et al. 2006). 

While aboveground net primary production (ANPP) 
is relatively stable in grassland species (Xia et al. 
2009; Fay et al. 2011; Morgan et al. 2011; Pendall et 
al. 2011), warming can reduce ANPP by increasing 
desiccation, as it did in a cool temperate climate for 
grassland assemblages (De Boeck et al. 2008), or 
increase ANPP, as it did in an Oklahoma tallgrass 
prairie, where deep soils contained sufficient soil 
moisture to support a 21% ANPP increase (Luo et al. 
2009). Because grazing lands are highly dependent 
on inherent environmental conditions, warming 
effects on these lands likely will differ regionally. 
In the Southwestern United States where water 
already exerts a major limitation on ANPP, rising 
temperature in combination with altered precipitation 
is expected to increase droughts (Seager and 
Vecchi 2010), with negative effects on grazing land 
productivity. In the northern Great Plains, where low 
temperatures can sometimes restrict growing season 
length, warmer temperatures alone or in combination 
with increased annual precipitation amounts should 
increase forage production (Morgan et al. 2008). In 
the Southeast, warmer temperatures are expanding 
the northern range of species once limited to the Gulf 
Coast Region (Gates et al. 2004) and may increase 
the length of growing season of C4 grasses while 
limiting the productive period and economic benefit 
of over-seeded C3 grasses and legumes. 

Precipitation Effects 

Our capacity to predict precipitation patterns is 
limited, but it is clear that changes in precipitation 
could dramatically affect grazing lands. Annual 
precipitation amount is the key driver affecting 
ANPP in native grasslands (Sala et al. 1988), 
although seasonal distribution of precipitation can be 
as important as total precipitation. The anticipated 
change in precipitation into fewer but larger events 
may increase both the frequency of drought and 
the probability of flooding (Knapp et al. 2008). 
In general, grazing land response to precipitation 
depends on complex interactions among quantity, 
frequency, and size of precipitation events (Fay et al. 
2008). Local or regional differences in evaporative 
demand, plant communities, and soil type regulate 
effects of more variable precipitation patterns on 
soil water dynamics, plant utilization, and species 
responses (Noy-Meir 1973; Bates et al. 2006; Knapp 
et al. 2008; Craine et al. 2010; Debinski et al. 2010; 
Whitford and Steinberger 2011). Even though ANPP 
and biodiversity can respond strongly to these altered 
dynamics (Bates et al. 2006; Robertson et al. 2010; 
Derner et al. 2011), results differ substantially among 
grazing land ecosystems. For instance, larger but less 
frequent precipitation events tend to decrease ANPP 
and other critical ecosystem functions in tallgrass 
prairie, but enhance ANPP in shortgrass steppe 
(Knapp et al. 2008; Heisler-White et al. 2009; Fay et 
al. 2011). 

Based on results from a unique multi-factor climate 
change experiment, Fay et al. (2011) propose the 
following conceptual model of grassland responses 
to warming and altered precipitation: 

 Inter-annual climate variation, mainly related 
to growing-season rainfall, drives inter-annual 
variation in average soil moisture and rates of key 
ecosystem processes. 

 Increased growing-season rainfall variability 
reduces rates of most ecosystem processes, resulting 
in lower ecosystem rainfall-use efficiency. 

 Warming stimulates rates of ecosystem processes 
active during cooler parts of the growing season, 
but increased rainfall variability and warming 
during the middle, warmer, and water-limited 
portions of the growing season likely will reduce 
rates of ecosystem processes. 

Chapter 5 


Enhanced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide 

In addition to its effects as a greenhouse gas, 
CO2 directly influences plants. Plant response to 
increased CO2 is driven by two basic mechanisms: 
a direct stimulation of photosynthesis and an 
indirect stimulation of plant water-use efficiency 
resulting from partial stomatal closure (Morgan 
et al. 2004). The direct photosynthetic response is 
much stronger in C3 than C4 plants; photosynthesis 
is nearly saturated at present atmospheric CO2 
concentrations in C4 plants, but unsaturated in C3 
plants (Polley 1997; Anderson et al. 2001; Reich 
et al. 2001; Poorter and Navas 2003). However, 
stomatal responses to CO2 are similar in some C3 and 
C4 plants (Wand et al. 1999). 

Recent research supports the notion that grasslands 
are particularly responsive to changes in CO2 due 
to their sensitivity to water. For tallgrass prairie 
species growing in three soil types of central Texas, 
CO2 acted as a surrogate for water by contributing 
to shifts in species abundances that mimic those 
observed along a precipitation gradient (Polley et 
al. 2011). In addition, CO2 enrichment promoted 
water savings in a northern mixed-grass prairie in 
Wyoming by completely off-setting desiccating 
effects of moderately warmer temperature (Morgan 
et al. 2011). The water-savings effect of CO2 
enrichment appears to be robust, having been 
detected in native vegetation around natural springs 
that have long been exposed to elevated CO2 (Onoda 
et al. 2009). 

Interactive Effects and Plant Community Responses 

Our ability to predict responses to global changes 
is limited by our incomplete understanding of how 
ecosystem effects of climate change factors interact 
(Shaw et al. 2002; Morgan et al. 2011). Leuzinger 
et al. (2011) demonstrate that the magnitude of 
ecosystem responses to climate change treatments 
usually declines as the number of factors considered 
increases. Mechanisms responsible for partially 
compensating effects of climate change treatments 
are not completely understood, but appear to differ 
among ecosystems and treatment combinations. 
Warming and CO2 enrichment have offsetting effects 
on soil water availability (Morgan et al. 2011). 
Limitations in soil nitrogen (Newman et al. 2006; 
Reich et al. 2006) or phosphorous (Gentile et al. 
2011) may constrain plant responses to CO2, while 
plant species shifts in response to nitrogen additions 
can favor plant species that respond limitedly to CO2 
(Langley and Megonigal 2010). 

Climate change effects often are interpreted in the 
context of a relatively stable plant community and 
unchanging disturbance regimes. It is becoming 
clear, however, that we can reliably predict climate 
change effects on productivity and other ecosystem 
processes only by accounting for interactions 
between environmental changes and other regulators 
of ecosystems, including soil resource supply, major 
functional groups of organisms, and disturbance 
regimes (Polley et al. 2011). Changes in these 
interactive regulators can feed back to dampen 
or amplify ecosystem responses to climate change 
factors. Most feedbacks will be negative and 
dampen global change effects on ecosystems (Luo 
et al. 2004). Indeed, ecosystem responses to global 
change treatments generally decline over longer time 
periods and larger spatial scales (Leuzinger et al. 
2011) because negative feedbacks from interactive 
regulators promote homeostasis in ecosystem 
processes. Changes in plant species and functional 
group composition can amplify ecosystem responses 
to global changes and thus contribute to beneficial 
(Zavaleta et al. 2003; Niu et al. 2010) or negative 
effects of global changes (Morgan et al. 2007; Suttle 
et al. 2007). 

Vegetation changes of greatest concern on 
extensively managed grazing lands are those that 
are essentially irreversible within the constraints 
of traditional management, and that fundamentally 
alter ecosystem structure and functioning. Such 
shifts between alternate stable states of vegetation 
usually occur when changes in soil properties, 
disturbance regimes, or animal populations remove 
limitations on increasing plants or create limitations 
on current dominants. 

Vegetation changes tend to occur gradually, as when 
woody plants replace grasses as a result of prolonged 
grazing, but also can occur abruptly, as when a 
threshold of soil loss or water content is crossed that 
prevents continued dominance by current species 
occupants of a site (Friedel 1991; Polley et al. 2011). 
Developmental changes, like flowering date, can 
exhibit threshold responses to precipitation that can 
have long-term and possibly transforming effects 
on plant community composition (Craine et al. 
2010; Fay et al. 2011). Climate extremes can have 
significant effects on biogeochemical functions like 
water relations and nutrient cycling, although longterm 
alterations in fundamental ecosystem attributes 
like net primary productivity (NPP) or functional 
group composition may involve more long-term 
changes (Arnone et al. 2011; Jentsch et al. 2011). 
Thus, global changes will more often influence the 
susceptibility of vegetation to disturbances and 
other factors like fire that directly influence the state 
of vegetation (Bond 2008). For more intensively 
managed mesic pastures (lands with well-balanced 
moisture supply), vegetation changes will involve 

Chapter 5 

Recent research 
supports the notion 
that grasslands are 
particularly responsive 
to changes in CO2 due to 
their sensitivity to water. 


considerations of which forage species and/or 
combinations will perform better in a changing 
environment (Sanderson et al. 2009). 

Effects on Forage Nutritive Value 

Grazing lands are managed to produce forage or 
fodder for livestock. The nutritional quality, as 
well as the quantity, of the forage/fodder resource 
is of interest. Nutritive value, in turn, depends on 
chemical and physical characteristics of each of 
the plant species that contribute to the resource 
and species composition. Global changes likely 
will cause modest changes in the forage quality 
of individual plant species. Most studies indicate 
rising CO2 and temperature reduce nutritive value 
of plants (Henderson and Robinson 1982; Akin et 
al. 1987; Newman et al. 2005; Morgan et al. 2008; 
Craine et al. 2010; Gentile et al. 2011), although 
complex interactions of global change factors on 
soil, available nutrients, and plant responses suggest 
that both increases and decreases in nutritive value 
are possible (Craine et al. 2010; Dijkstra et al. 2010). 
On the other hand, global changes could cause 
substantial shifts, either beneficial or negative, in 
forage nutritive value by contributing to vegetation 
change. For instance, CO2 enrichment increased 
the nutritional value of grass biomass by shifting 
the relative abundance of tallgrass prairie species 
(Polley et al. 2011). By contrast, global changes 
that facilitate a shift in vegetation from forage to 
non-forage species, such as from grasses to weeds 
or woody plants (Morgan et al. 2007; Morgan et 
al. 2008), will substantially reduce forage nutritive 
value. 

Effects of Climate Change on Animal Health 

Climate change may indirectly affect animal 
production by altering the frequency, intensity, or 
distribution of animal diseases and parasites. Climate 
affects microbial density and distribution, the 
distribution of vector-borne diseases, host resistance 
to infections, food and water shortages, or foodborne 
diseases (Baylis and Githeko 2006; Gaughan 
et al. 2009; Thornton 2010). Earlier springs and 
warmer winters may allow for greater proliferation 
and survivability of pathogens and parasites. For 
example, bluetongue was recently reported in Europe 
for the first time in 20 years (Baylis and Githeko 
2006). 

Regional warming and changes in rainfall 
distribution may lead to changes in the spatial 
or temporal distributions of diseases sensitive to 
moisture, such as anthrax, blackleg, hemorrhagic 
septicemia, and vector-borne diseases (Baylis and 
Githeko 2006). Climate change also may influence 
the abundance and/or distribution of the competitors, 
predators, and parasites of vectors themselves 
(Thornton 2010). Hotter weather may increase 
the incidence of ketosis, mastitis, and lameness 
in dairy cows and enhance growth of mycotoxinproducing 
fungi, particularly if moisture conditions 
are favorable (Gaughan et al. 2009). However, there 
is no consistent evidence that heat stress negatively 
affects overall immune function in cattle, chickens, 
or pigs. 

Adaptation 

Adaptation is defined as an adjustment in natural 
or human systems in response to actual or expected 
global changes or their effects (IPCC 2007a). 
Adaptation to global changes will necessitate 
adjustments at the enterprise to regional scales and 
likely will include changes in management, livestock 
species or breeds, pest management strategies, or 
even enterprise structure (Morgan 2005; Morgan et 
al. 2008). 

Animal Adaptation 

In an effort to optimize animal production, producers 
likely must select breeds and breed types that are 
genetically adapted to changed climate conditions. 
Climate change and associated variation in weather 
patterns may also require that livestock be managed 
in or near facilities in which the microclimate 
can be modified (Mader et al. 1997; Mader et al. 
1999; Gaughan et al. 2002b; Mader et al. 2007). 
Environmental management for all domestic 
livestock, but especially for ruminants, needs to 
consider (1) general short- and long-term changes in 
environmental conditions, (2) changes in nighttime 
conditions that do not allow for adequate cooling, 
and (3) increases in the occurrence of extreme events 
(e.g., hotter daily maximum temperature and more/ 
longer heat waves). 

Rtter and van de Geijn (1999) suggest that effects 
of heat stress may be relatively minor for the more 
intensive livestock production 
systems where 
some control can be exercised over the exposure of 
animals to climate. In general, domestic livestock 
are remarkable in their ability to mobilize coping 
mechanisms when challenged by environmental 
stressors. Breeding and selection criteria for domestic 
livestock need to be considered in the context of 
climate change, especially for those systems in which 
livestock are routinely exposed to the environment. 
Adapting to climate change is certain to entail costs, 
such as application of environmental modification 
techniques, use of more suitably adapted animals, or 
even shifting animal populations. 

Chapter 5 

Climate change and 
associated variation 
in weather patterns 
may also require that 
livestock be managed 
in or near facilities in 
which the microclimate 
can be modified. 


Depending on the domestic species of livestock, 
adaptive responses may include hair coat gain or loss 
through growth and shedding processes, respectively. 
As a survival mechanism, voluntary dry matter intake 
increases (after a 1-to-2-day decline) under cold 
stress, and decreases almost immediately under heat 
stress (NRC 1987, 1996). Depending on the intensity 
and duration of the environmental stress, DMI can 
average as much as 30% above normal to as much as 
50% below normal. Under extremely hot conditions, 
animals may completely lose appetite, while under 
extreme cold conditions animals may find comfort in 
maintaining a huddled position with other animals or 
remain lying. Due to the discomfort levels associated 
with standing and accessing feed, DMI and related 
performance is further compromised under cold 
stress. However, many adaptive and behavioral 
adjustments made by the animal, when exposed 
to moderate to extreme environmental conditions, 
often result in lowered animal productivity and 
are generally unfavorable to economic interests of 
humans. However, these changes are often essential 
for survival of the animals (Stott 1981; Gaughan et 
al. 2009). 

Beede and Collier (1986) suggest three 
management options for reducing the effect of 
thermal stress in cattle, which have application 
for all livestock and poultry. The options include 
(1) physical modification of the environment, 
(2) genetic development of breeds with greater 
heat tolerance, and (3) improved nutritional 
management during periods of high heat load. As is 
the case in most livestock systems today, housing 
and microclimate modification considerations 
(sunshades, or evaporative cooling by direct wetting 
or in conjunction with mechanical ventilation), 
improvements in nutritional management and disease 
control, and use of new technologies will need to 
be assessed as change dictates (Gaughan and Mader 
2007; Mader et al. 2008; Gaughan et al. 2009). 
Included in that assessment will have to be cost of 
implementation of altered or new processes, which 
will be particularly pertinent in less developed and 
less intensive production systems. An additional 
consideration is that modifying management and/ 
or genetics for one environmental extreme may 
have adverse effects if the livestock are exposed to 
the opposite environmental extreme. In addition, 
appropriate environmental stress thresholds are 
needed that are flexible and can reflect stress levels 
based on environmental conditions, management 
levels, and physiological status. 


Mader et al. (2010, 2011) developed a Comprehensive 
Climate Index (CCI) and comparable 
thresholds framework that incorporate multiple 
environmental variables into a continuous index 
that adjusts temperature for the combined effects of 
relative humidity, wind speed, and solar radiation 
(Table 5.10). CCIs purpose is to provide a 
relative indicator of the environmental conditions 
surrounding an animal and quantify how solar 
radiation, wind speed, and relative humidity interact 

Chapter 5 


Cold conditions 
Animal susceptibility level 
Environment Hot conditions2 High3 Low4 
No stress < 25 > 5 > 0 
Mild 25 to 30 0 to 5 0 to -10 
Moderate > 30 to 35 < 0 to -5 < -10 to -20 
Severe > 35 to 40 < -5 to -10 < -20 to -30 
Extreme > 40 to 45 < -10 to -15 < -30 to -40 
Extreme danger > 45 < -15 < -40 
Source: Mader et al. 2011 
1Threshold levels indicate intensity of climatic stress experienced by the animal. 
2Modified from indices developed by Mader et al. (Mader et al. 2006), Gaughan et al. (Gaughan et al. 2008), and the 
Livestock Weather Safety index (LCI 1970) with severe thresholds capable of causing death of animals and extreme 
thresholds having a high probability of causing death of high risk animals. 
3Generally, young and/or non-acclimated animals cared for under sheltered (housed) or modified environmental 
conditions. 
4Generally, unsheltered animals which have had adequate time to acclimate to outdoor environments through 
acquisition of additional external and/or tissue insulation and are receiving nutrient supplies compatible to the level 
of environmental exposure. 
Table 5.10. Comprehensive Climate Index thermal stress thresholds.1 
Source: Mader et al. 2011. 


with ambient temperature (Ta) to produce an 
apparent temperature and identify thresholds that 
assist with assessing levels of stress (Table 5.11). 

A multi-factor index is superior to a single factor 
index for determining environmental effects on 
animal well-being. For strategic decisionmaking, 
the goal should be to have an index that is broadly 
applicable across life stages and species to maximize 
the utility of probability information (Hahn et al. 
2003). Aside from assessing environmental effects 
on animal health, comfort, welfare, maintenance, and 
productivity, the CCI could be adapted to calculate 
projected effects of climate change year-round. 

Other useful indices that have merit for assessing 
environmental stress in animals (FASS 2010), 
include the recently revised wind-chill index (Tew 
et al. 2002) and modifications to the temperaturehumidity 
index (Eigenberg et al. 2005; Mader et al. 
2006). In addition, Hahn and Mader (1997), Hahn et 
al. (1999), and Gaughan et al. (2008) have developed 
classification schemes to assess the magnitude 
(intensity x duration) of extreme heat events that 
place animals at risk. 

A final management issue related to climate change 
is water availability and utilization. Water has been 
recognized as one of the most important necessities 
for life. It plays a key role in virtually all biochemical 
reactions in the body and is considered to be one of 
the quickest and most efficient methods to reduce 
body temperature during warmer periods. During 
heat waves, normal heat exchange is impeded in 
livestock, which affects the thermal equilibrium of 
the animal and its performance. 

Per unit of feed intake, water intake is generally two 
to three times greater under hot conditions than under 
cold conditions (Kreikemeier and Mader 2004; Arias 
et al. 2011). The interaction among climatic factors, 
type of diet, animal breed, animal weight, production 
status, and physiological strategies adopted by each 
animal all influence an individual animals water 
intake. In addition, drinking behavior is complex 
and influenced by a number of social and physical 
factors, including degree of competition for water 
space, group social order, water availability and 
accessibility, and water quality. 

Grassland Adaptation 

Three aspects of plant community production 
determine the economic viability of livestock 
enterprises on lands that are managed primarily to 
produce forage for grazing animals. These factors are 
the seasonal distribution and quantity of forage, the 
inter-annual reliability of forage production (inverse 
of variability), and forage nutritive value, as affected 
by nutritional and physical properties of individual 
plant species and plant species composition. 
Warming, CO2 enrichment, and altered precipitation 
regimes can affect each aspect of community 
production. Modest shifts in the seasonal distribution 
of forage production and quality and increases in 
inter-annual variability of production likely can 

Chapter 5 

Table 5.11. Apparent temperature estimates as derived from primary environmental characteristics and the Comprehensive Climate Index 
equations.1 Source: Mader et al., 2010 

Temperature, 
C 
Wind speed of 1 m/s Wind speed of 9 m/s 
SR of 100 W/m2 SR of 500 W/m2 SR of 900 W/m2 SR of 100 W/m2 SR of 500 W/m2 SR of 900 W/m2 
RH of 
20% 
RH of 
50% 
RH of 
80% 
RH of 
20% 
RH of 
50% 
RH of 
80% 
RH of 
20% 
RH of 
50% 
RH of 
80% 
RH of 
20% 
RH of 
50% 
RH of 
80% 
RH of 
20% 
RH of 
50% 
RH of 
80% 
RH of 
20% 
RH of 
50% 
RH of 
80% 
-30 -32.8 -33.9 -35.0 -29.0 -30.0 -31.2 -25.3 -26.4 -27.5 -41.8 -42.9 -44.1 -38.0 -39.1 -40.2 -34.4 -35.4 -36.6 
-25 -27.4 -28.6 -30.0 -23.8 -25.0 -26.3 -20.3 -21.5 -22.9 -36.4 -37.7 -39.0 -32.8 -34.0 -35.4 -29.3 -30.6 -31.9 
-20 -22.0 -23.3 -24.7 -18.5 -19.9 -21.3 -15.2 -16.5 -17.9 -31.0 -32.3 -33.8 -27.6 -28.9 -30.3 -24.2 -25.5 -27.0 
-15 -16.6 -17.9 -19.3 -13.3 -14.6 -16.0 -10.0 -11.4 -12.8 -25.6 -26.9 -28.4 -22.3 -23.6 -25.1 -19.1 -20.4 -21.8 
-10 -11.2 -12.4 -13.8 -8.0 -9.2 -10.6 -4.8 -6.1 -7.4 -20.2 -21.5 -22.8 -17.1 -18.3 -19.6 -13.9 -15.1 -16.5 
-5 -5.8 -6.8 -8.0 -2.7 -3.7 -4.9 0.4 -0.7 -1.8 -14.8 -15.9 -17.1 -11.7 -12.8 -14.0 -8.7 -9.7 -10.9 
0 -0.4 -1.2 -2.1 2.6 1.9 1.0 5.7 4.9 4.0 -9.4 -10.2 -11.1 -6.4 -7.2 -8.1 -3.4 -4.2 -5.0 
5 5.0 4.6 4.1 8.0 7.6 7.1 11.0 10.6 10.1 -4.1 -4.5 -5.0 -1.0 -1.5 -2.0 2.0 1.5 1.0 
10 10.4 10.4 10.4 13.4 13.4 13.4 16.4 16.4 16.4 1.3 1.3 1.3 4.4 4.4 4.4 7.4 7.4 7.4 
15 15.8 16.3 16.9 18.8 19.4 20.0 21.8 22.4 23.0 6.7 7.2 7.8 9.8 10.3 10.9 12.8 13.3 13.9 
20 21.1 22.3 23.6 24.3 25.4 26.7 27.3 28.5 29.8 12.1 13.3 14.6 15.2 16.4 17.7 18.3 19.4 20.7 
25 26.5 28.4 30.5 29.7 31.6 33.8 32.8 34.7 36.8 17.5 19.3 21.5 20.7 22.6 24.7 23.8 25.6 27.8 
30 31.9 34.6 37.7 35.2 37.9 41.0 38.4 41.1 44.2 22.8 25.5 28.6 26.2 28.9 32.0 29.3 32.0 35.1 
35 37.3 40.9 45.0 40.8 44.4 48.5 44.0 47.6 51.8 28.2 31.8 36.0 31.7 35.3 39.5 34.9 38.5 42.7 
40 42.6 47.2 52.6 46.3 50.9 56.3 49.7 54.3 59.6 33.6 38.2 43.5 37.3 41.9 47.2 40.6 45.2 50.6 
45 48.0 53.7 60.3 51.9 57.6 64.3 55.4 61.1 67.7 38.9 44.6 51.3 42.9 48.6 55.2 46.3 52.0 58.7 
Mader et al. (2010); 1SR = solar radiation; RH = relative humidity 
be accommodated by adjusting stocking rates and 
varying the season of grazing (Morgan 2005; Morgan 
et al. 2008; Torell et al. 2010). Adaptation also could 
include practices that lessen soil erosion, maintain 
vegetative cover, and promote plant regeneration 
after vegetation is removed or lost. 

Innovative changes in management, such as a shift 
in livestock species, may be required to deal with 
changes in species abundance, forage quantity, and 
nutritive value. In intensively managed pastures, 
more reliance on species that may be better adapted 
to future warmer, CO2-enriched conditions, like 
legumes or C4 grasses (Nolan et al. 2001; Gates et al. 
2004; Morgan 2005; Hopkins and Del Prado 2007; 
Morgan et al. 2011), may be advantageous. 

Domestic livestock are remarkable in their adaptive 
ability when challenged by moderate levels of 
environmental stressors. Adaptive responses to 
climate change could involve a shift to livestock 
types with greater tolerance of relatively high 
temperatures, which better utilize existing 
vegetation and are more resistant to livestock pests 
(Morgan 2005). Livestock managers will need to 
be proactive and consider resource availability 
(e.g., feed, water, health care, fiscal, animals, 
land base, human) when adopting climate change 
mitigation strategies. According to Gaughan et al. 
(2009), the most important element of proactive 
environmental management is to reduce risk through 
preparation. Included in the preparation process is 
appropriate education and training, development of 
strategic plans for adjusting to changing conditions, 
recognition of animal needs and potential stress 
levels, adopting strategies to minimize and/or 
mitigate the stress, and selection of animals and 
management strategies that are compatible with the 
production enterprise. 

Monitoring of pasture and rangeland conditions 
will become even more important as managers deal 
with novel climatic conditions (Morgan et al. 2008). 
Certainly a shift in current enterprise structure 
will occur. For example, change from grassland to 
woodland vegetation may require diversification of 
land uses, perhaps including a shift from livestock 
production only to ecotourism, hunting, wind energy, 
or carbon sequestration (Morgan 2005; de Steiguer 
2008; Morgan et al. 2008). However, caution should 
be exercised that overcompensation to changing 
climatic conditions does not occur. An approach is 
needed that will allow appropriate changes to occur 
in a timely manner while avoiding undo disturbance 
of the socio-economic structure of the livestock 
and grassland production systems. A greater 
understanding of the animal and grassland responses 
to environmental challenges is essential to successful 
implementation of strategies to ameliorate negative 
effects of climate change. 

Conclusions 

The direct and indirect effects of changing climate 
create threats and opportunities for U.S. agriculture. 
The direct effects of changing temperature and 
precipitation patterns are widely acknowledged 
and investigated. Producers and researchers have 
traditionally faced challenges of temperature and 
moisture changes with success. However the shortterm 
high variability of weather events currently 
being experienced are outside of the realm of 
experience for the agricultural community. Given 
a continued trend of this variability, a shift of 
management focus from mostly average conditions 
to that of focus on managing average plus extreme 
conditions may well be advised. The addition of 
event duration or maximum tolerable change 
per day, especially for sensitive growth stages, are 
potential additions to threshold tables defining the 
temperature and moisture limits for specific crops. 
Dealing with the weather manifestations of climate 
change will be integral to decisionmaking for future 
producers, more so than for that of past generations. 

The complex nature of the agroecosystem means 
that effects of climate change on system components 
will vary broadly across geographies and temporal 
scales. Assessing the full effect of climate change 
on U.S. agricultural products will require integrated 
studies that incorporate the nuances of ecosystem 
function such as soil make-up, changes in timing of 
runoff, and effects of changing temperature patterns 
and CO2 concentrations, together with factors related 
to production economics, management strategy 
approaches and implementation, and adaptation 
practices. Such studies will also feed creation of 
models that may more accurately project future 
changes and assess effects of land-use or waterresource 
changes that may affect crops, and assist 
with developing strategies that can provide insights 
on increasing efficient use of available resources. In 
addition, adaptation management practices would 
benefit from further research on adaptive cultivars 
and crop genetics so as to mitigate projected declines 
in future yields by taking better advantage of climatedriven 
shifts in ecosystem characteristics through 
breeding for physiological pathways that increase 
resilience to climate stressors. Lastly, managing for 
changing climate will benefit from further research 

Chapter 5 

Domestic livestock are 
remarkable in their 
adaptive ability when 
challenged by moderate 
levels of environmental 
stressors. Adaptive 
responses to climate 
change could involve a 
shift to livestock types 
with greater tolerance 
of relatively high 
temperatures, which better 
utilize existing vegetation 
and are more resistant to 
livestock pests. 


into technologies that improve management of 
agricultural products through further automation 
of processes and tools, sensor development, and 
enhancement of information technologies. Advancing 
these research needs will assist those working in 
the realm of U.S. agriculture by providing both 
pragmatic solutions while potentially reducing costs 
related effects of climate change on agricultural 
production. 

Chapter 5 


The economic impacts of climate change occur 
at multiple scales and with a complex array 
of feedback loops. While the biophysical 
effects of climate change play out locally through the 
direct and indirect (abiotic and biotic) stress factors 
described earlier, the economic implications of those 
effects are shaped by an array of local, national, 
and global institutions, from commodity markets to 
systems of research, development, education, communication, 
and transportation. These institutions 
define the opportunities and constraints within which 
stakeholders can adjust their behavior to minimize 
losses and take advantage of new opportunities for 
gain associated with changing climate conditions. 
Potential adaptive behavior can occur at any level 
within a highly diverse agricultural system, including 
consumption, production, education, and research. 
The aggregate effects of climate change will therefore 
ultimately depend on a web of diffuse adaptive 
responses to local climate stressors, from farmers 
adjusting planting patterns in response to altered crop 
yields to seed producers investing in drought-tolerant 
varieties to nations changing trade restrictions in 
response to food security concerns. 

The complexity of possible adaptive response 
pathways makes it extremely difficult to characterize 
all of the potential steps and feedback loops leading 
from local climate effects on yield (or on increased 
costs necessary to maintain yields) to regional or 
global effects on economic indicators such as prices, 
production, trade volume, consumer expenditures, 
or producer income and financial viability. U.S. and 
global agricultural markets are highly interconnected, 
and trade will result in a redistribution of agricultural 
products from regions of relative surplus to regions 
of relative scarcity (Adams et al. 1998). The economic 
implications of climate change for the United 
States will therefore be sensitive to yield effects and 
adaptation opportunities and constraints both within 
the United States and worldwide. An even broader 
set of social and political variables is required to 


Chapter 6 

Climate Change Effects on the
Economics of U.S. Agriculture 

Economic versus Biophysical Impacts on Agricultural Productivity 

Biophysical impacts on productivity are localized phenomena that are largely driven by local variations 
in weather impacts and mediated by local soil and water conditions. Economic impacts, on the other 
hand, are embedded within a complex and regionally diffuse web of production, price, consumption, 
and trade responses to those local productivity impacts. U.S. and global agricultural markets are highly 
interconnected, so economic impacts within the United States are sensitive to biophysical impacts, 
behavioral responses among consumers and producers, and adaptation opportunities and constraints 
both within the United States and worldwide. Managing the impacts of climate change on U.S. agriculture 
is an interdisciplinary challenge that may be most effectively addressed using systems research strategies 
to integrate and develop disciplinary knowledge. 

Example: Climate change can impact the livestock sector along a number of pathways: directly through 
impacts on productivity and performance and indirectly through price and availability of feed grains, 
competition for pasture land, and changing patterns and prevalence of pests and diseases. These 
pathways parallel those of crop production impact, and the two sectors are strongly linked through feed 
grain markets and competition for land. 


100 

explore the implications of climate change for critical 
social issues such as food security and the incidence 
of hunger. 

A comprehensive analysis of climate effects requires 
bringing together state-of-the-art knowledge from 
multiple disciplines and areas of expertise (Beach 
et al. 2010; Tubiello et al. 2007a; Hertel et al. 
2010). Developing economic-impact estimates for 
climate change requires input from disciplines as 
diverse as climate, crop, and soil science, as well 
as the tools and data to represent a wide variety of 
potential adaptive and economic behaviors. While 
research is advancing on disciplinary elements of 
the system, transdisciplinary efforts have struggled 
with inconsistent data, poor communication 
between disciplines, and the resource challenges 
of developing new data sets and analysis tools 
to incorporate information from different 
disciplines. Efforts such as the Agricultural Model 
Intercomparison and Improvement Project (see 
AgMIP sidebar pg. 108) have been initiated to tackle 
such challenges while developing and validating 
scenarios, research tools, and analysis results 
characterizing changes to the risk of hunger and 
world food security due to climate change. 

The biophysical effects of climate change on yields 
and production costs are regionally variable and 
have the potential to significantly alter patterns of 
agricultural productivity in the provision of food, 
feed, fiber, and fuel products worldwide. Because 
the agricultural economy is a complex, selfadjusting 
set of relationships, ultimately climate 
change effects will depend on how production and 
consumption systems adjust, or adapt, in response 
to those biophysical effects. This chapter reviews 
efforts to quantify the economic impacts of climate 
change to date and explores issues related to 
the scope and scale of those analyses. Capacity 
for economic impact quantification is evolving, 
however assessment results remain highly sensitive 
to elements of research scope such as exclusion 
versus inclusion of international effects, selective 
treatment of climate stressors when assessing yield 
and production cost impacts, selective representation 
of adaptation opportunities in response to yield and 
production cost impacts, and limited consideration of 
potential constraints to adaptation, including natural 
and financial resource constraints. 

Economic Impacts and Agricultural 
Adaptation 

Agricultural production is chronically vulnerable 
to stress factors like dry spells, weed competition, 
and insect damage. Local farm production patterns 
and practices have evolved in response to weather 
conditions and stress factors that have historically 
prevailed for that region. As growing conditions and 
stress factors change, so too will farm production 
decisions. Adaptation behaviors such as changing 
crops and crop varieties, adjusting planting and 
harvest dates, and modifying input use and tillage 
practices can lessen yield losses from climate change 
in some regions and potentially increase yields 
in others where climate change creates expanded 
opportunities for production (Adams et al. 1998; 
Malcolm et al. 2012). Several regional and national 
studies have predicted that U.S. cropland agriculture 
will be fairly resilient to climate change in the short 
term, with expansion of irrigated acreage, regional 
shifts of crop acreage, and other adjustments to 
inputs and outputs partially compensating for yield 
effects caused by changing climate patterns (Adams 
et al. 1990; Mendelsohn et al. 1994). 

Capacity for adaptation is therefore a critical 
determinant of the net economic effects of climate 
change and of the regional distribution of those 
effects (Antle and Capalbo 2010; Malcolm et al. 
2012). Adaptive behavior can significantly mitigate 
the potential effects of climate change on food 
production, farm income, and food security by 
moving agricultural production out of regions with 
newly reduced comparative advantage in specific 
production sectors and into areas with improved 
relative productivity (Rosenzweig and Parry 1994; 
Darwin et al. 1995; Adams et al. 1998; Mendelsohn 
and Dinar 1999; Malcolm et al. 2012; Beach et 
al. 2010). Darwin et al. (1995) estimated that 
farmers adjusting inputs and outputs on existing 
farmland could offset from 79 to 88% of the 19-30% 
reductions in world cereals production (wheat plus 
other grains) that they attribute to the direct crop 
growth and development effects of climate change. 
In that analysis, market adjustments further increased 
the percentage of yield decline offset to 97%, and 
expansion of cropland actually resulted in an increase 
in world cereal production relative to the no climate 
change scenario (Darwin et al. 1995). Reilly et al. 
(2007) estimate that with adaptation, the production 
effects of climate change are reduced to one-fifth 
to one-sixth of the initial yield effects. While such 
analyses highlight that the economic impacts 
of climate change will be sensitive to all such 
opportunities for, and constraints to, technological 
and behavioral adaptation, they have their strengths 

Chapter 6 

Adaptive behavior can 
significantly mitigate 
the potential effects 
of climate change on 
food production, farm 
income, and food security 
by moving agricultural 
production out of regions 
with newly reduced 
comparative advantage 
in specific production 
sectors and into areas 
with improved relative 
productivity. 


and weaknesses with respect to treatment of 
those factors when translating climate effects into 
economic impacts. 

Estimating Economic Impacts of Climate 
Change 

An assessment of the economic impacts of 
climate change on agriculture begins with a set of 
assumptions or projections about future climate 
conditions, generally including some combination 
of information on patterns and magnitude of 
temperature and precipitation change (Tol 2009). 
Local climate conditions must be then translated 
into local yield and production cost impacts based 
on a subset of stressors and simultaneously into a 
set of economic indicators through representation 
of a portion of the potential production, price, 
consumption, technology development, and trade 
responses to those productivity effects. 

Economic impacts of climate change can occur 
at many levels and to different stakeholders. 
Farmers (producers) are affected by initial yield 
and production cost effects, which they respond 
to through adaptive strategies and, subsequently, 
by the price effects that emerge from the market 
adjustments responding to widespread influences 
on productivity and adaptive behaviors. Consumers 
are affected by market price changes and also have 
adaptation options including changing consumption 
patterns to substitute relatively low-priced products 
for products that have become higher priced due to 
the effects of climate (Adams et al. 1998). 

Efforts to quantify economic impacts are sensitive to 
research elements that define input assumptions and 
scale and scope of analysis, including: 

 Climate and Yield Projections (and associated 
time horizon): Biophysical and economic impact 
assessment results are highly sensitive to the 
choice of climate model and projection used and 
to the spatial resolution of those climate scenarios 
(Malcolm, 2012; Beach et al. 2010; Adams et 
al. 1990; Adams et al. 1995; Adams et al. 2003). 
Climate analyses that project farther into the 
future generally show greater effect on yields and 
economic indicators, though there is also greater 
uncertainty about future emissions trajectories, 
projected changes of climate variables, and available 
adaptive technologies. Treatment of CO2 fertilization 
effects (i.e., whether, and how, potential 
yield-enhancing effects of increased atmospheric 
CO2 are included in the study) is also an important 
determinant of results (Adams et al. 1990; Adams 
et al. 1995; Adams et al. 1998; Antle et al. 2004; 
Sands and Edmonds 2005; Cline 2007). 

 Scope of the Assessment: Potential adaptive 
responses to climate change occur at many scales 
and across multiple sectors, interacting across 
land, commodity, and agricultural input markets. 
Researchers must decide how to condense the 
complex detail associated with the true scope of 
climate effects on agriculture and the adaptation 
response into a simplified version of reality that 
captures particularly significant dynamics. Those 
decisions include, for instance, the types of available 
adaptation options and whether the assessment 
includes consumer response and effect as 
well as that of producers, livestock, forest production, 
cropland agriculture, and international and 
domestic interests (Adams et al. 1998; Sands and 
Edmonds 2005; Hertel et al. 2010b). The exploration 
and identification of relevant dynamics, and 
compilation of the data necessary to represent 
these dynamics in impact analyses is an ongoing 
process. 

 Socioeconomic and Technology Projections and 
Treatment of Adaptation Constraints: Climate 
change effects and opportunities for adaptation 
will unfold within a future economic, policy, and 
technology environment that is inherently uncertain. 
Variables relevant to agricultures response 
to climate change range from broader social 
variables about economic and income growth to 
sector-specific assumptions including future crop 
and livestock productivity, farm policy, farm size, 
input and output prices, and availability of technical 
resources to facilitate adaptation (Claessens et 
al. 2012). Potential constraints to adaptation such 
as regional land and water availability, as well as 
constraints related to farm finances and viability, 
have received relatively little research attention 
yet have been shown to significantly affect the 
results emerging from both integrated assessments 
and statistical analyses of climate change effects 
(Adams et al. 1995; Darwin et al. 1995; Howden 
et al. 2007; Schlenker et al. 2007). 

 Estimation methodology Used and Model 
Specification: Methods used for climate change 
assessment include expert opinion, hedonic and 
production function approaches, and integrated 
assessment modeling (Schlenker et al. 2005, Antle 
and Capalbo, 2010). 

Results from a limited set of economic impact 
studies are presented in Table 6.1. These results, and 
the source of variability among them, are discussed 
in more detail in the sections below. 

Chapter 6 


Chapter 6 

Table 6.1. Results from a limited set of studies exploring the domestic economic impacts of climate change. 

Study Climate 
Models 
Used 
Economic 
Estimation 
Method 
Used 
Climate Change 
Condition or Year 
Economic Impacts: 
Producers 
Economic Impacts: 
Consumers 
Total Economic 
Impact 
Impacts on 
Prices or Price 
Index 
Climate 
Elements 
Changed 
Including 
CO2 
Impact 
on Crop 
Yields 
Include International 
Production 
Impacts 
Adams et al, 
1990 
NASA/GISS Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(630 ppm) 
+1.59 billion 
1982$ 
+9.30 billion 
1982$ 
+10.89 billion 
1982$ 
crops - (.83) 
livestock - (.84) 
temp, precip, 
incident 
solar rad 
yes no 
Adams et al, 
1990 
GFDL Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(600 ppm) 
+3.55 billion 
1982$ 
-13.89 billion 
1982$ 
-10.33 billion 
1982$ 
crops + (1.34) 
livestock + (1.08) 
temp, precip, 
incident 
solar rad 
yes no 
Adams et al, 
1995 
NASA/GISS Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+10.79 billion 
1990$ 
-22.12 billion 
1990$ 
-11.33 billion 
1990$ (-1.01%) 
+ (1.12) temp, 
precip 
no effect no 
Adams et al, 
1995 
NASA/GISS Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+12.74 billion 
1990$ 
-2.54 billion 
1990$ 
+10.20 billion 
1990$ (+.91%) 
+ (1.01) yes, 555 
ppm 
no 
Adams et al, 
1995 
NASA/GISS Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+12.56 billion 
1990$ 
-1.74 billion 
1990$ 
+10.82 billion 
1990$ (+.96%) 
+ (1.01) yes, 555 
ppm 
yes, through 
trade adjustment 
Adams et al, 
1995 
GFDL Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+16.84 billion 
1990$ 
-35.93 billion 
1990$ 
-19.09 billion 
1990$ (-1.70%) 
+ (1.21) temp, 
precip 
no effect no 
Adams et al, 
1995 
GFDL Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+7.22 billion 
1990$ 
-2.65 billion 
1990$ 
+4.57 billion 1990$ 
(+.41%) 
+ (1.01) yes, 555 
ppm 
no 
Adams et al, 
1995 
GFDL Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+6.61 billion 
1990$ 
-2.24 billion 
1990$ 
+4.37 billion 1990$ 
(+.39%) 
+ (1.01) yes, 555 
ppm 
yes, through 
trade adjustment 
Adams et al, 
1995 
UKMO Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+114.97 billion 
1990$ 
-181.98 billion 
1990$ 
-67.01 billion 
1990$ (-5.96%) 
+ (2.09) temp, 
precip 
no effect no 
Adams et al, 
1995 
UKMO Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+41.52 billion 
1990$ 
-59.11 billion 
1990$ 
-17.58 billion 
1990$ (-1.57%) 
+(1.33) yes, 555 
ppm 
no 
Adams et al, 
1995 
UKMO Simulation 
(ASM) 
Doubled effective CO2 
(555 ppm) (~2060) 
+44.44 billion 
1990$ 
-35.41 billion 
1990$ 
+9.03 billion 
1990$ (+.80%) 
+ (1.35) yes, 555 
ppm 
yes, through 
trade adjustment 
Adams et al, 
2003 
CSIRO 
(coarse 
resolution) 
Simulation 
(ASM) 
540 ppm -3.31 billion 
2000$ (no adapt.) 
-3.87 billion 
2000$ (with adapt.) 
+6.36 billion 
2000$ (no adapt.) 
+9.66 billion 
2000$ (with adapt.) 
+3.05 billion 
2000$ (no adapt.) 
+5.69 billion 
2000$ (with adapt.) 
temp, 
precip, incident 
solar 
radiation 
yes no 
Adams et al, 
2003 
RegCM (finer 
resolution) 
Simulation 
(ASM) 
540 ppm -3.41 billion 
2000$ (no adapt.) 
-4.67 billion 
2000$ (with adapt.) 
+3.73 billion 
2000$ (no adapt.) 
+8.27 billion 
2000$ (with adapt.) 
+.32 billion 
2000$ (no adapt.) 
+3.61 billion 
2000$ (with adapt.) 
temp, 
precip, incident 
solar 
radiation 
yes no 
Alig et al, 
2002 
Hadley 
Center 
Model 
Simulation 
(FASOM) 
avg climate conditions 
2070-2100; economic 
projection 100 years 
-7.1% (Forestry) 
-15.9% (Agriculture) 
+1.3% (Forestry) 
+2.0% (Agriculture) 
+.7% (both sectors) temp, 
precip 
not clear no 
Alig et al, 
2002 
Canadian 
Climate 
Model 
Simulation 
(FASOM) 
avg climate conditions 
2070-2100; economic 
projection 100 years 
-5.5% (Forestry) 
-7.6% (Agriculture) 
+1.0% (Forestry) 
+1.0% (Agriculture) 
+.4% (both sectors) temp, 
precip 
not clear no 
Reilly et al, 
2003 
Canadian Climate 
Model 
Simulation 
(ASM) 
2030/2090 -.1 to -5 billion 
2000$ (range includes 
both GCMs) 
+$2.5 to +$13 billion 
2000$ (range 
includes both 
GCMs) 
+$0.8 billion 
2000$ (2030) 
+$3.2 billion 
2000$ (2090) 
Prices generally 
drop 
temp, 
precip 
yes Trade 
results 
presented in 
Reilly et al 
(2001) 
Reilly et al, 
2003 
Hadley Center 
Model 
Simulation 
(ASM) 
2030/2090 -.1 to -5 billion 
2000$ (range includes 
both GCMs) 
+$2.5 to +$13 
billion 
2000$ (range includes 
both GCMs) 
+$7.8 billion 
2000$ (2030) 
+$12.2 billion 
2000$ (2090) 
Prices generally 
drop 
temp, 
precip 
yes Trade 
results 
presented in 
Reilly et al 
(2001) 
Sands et al, 
2005 
UIUC (Univ 
of Illinois) 
Simulation 
(ASM) 
-4.2% -2.6% -6.8% (drop in primary 
agricultural 
output) 
prices generally 
increase 
temp, 
precip 
no yes 
Sands et al, 
2005 
UIUC (Univ 
of Illinois) 
Simulation 
(ASM) 
+6.8% +2.2% +9.0% prices generally 
drop 
temp, 
precip 
yes yes 
Sensitivity of Economic Impact 
Estimates 
to Climate and Yield 
Projections 

Projections of the economic impacts of climate 
change are highly sensitive to assumptions made 
about the production cost and yield effects associated 
with changing climate conditions, which, in turn, 
vary widely with climate change projections used, 
time horizon of analysis, and assumptions made 
about the effects of uncertain processes such as CO2 
fertilization. 

Several studies of climate change effects within the 
United States have suggested that moderate levels of 
climate change will increase crop yields on average, 
resulting in net positive estimates of welfare change 
in the United States (Reilly et al. 2003; McCarl 
2008; Sands and Edmonds 2005). Reilly et al. (2003) 
and McCarl (2008) estimated an increase in U.S. 
consumer welfare in response to climate change 
because productivity increases resulted in price drops 
and reductions in consumer cost. However, producer 
welfare in the United States declined because the 
drop in prices offset producer benefits accruing from 
yield increases. Yield increases were regionally 
variable, however, with yields and producer returns 
in the South more negatively impacted than in the 
North. Sands and Edmonds (2005) found that the 
observed price decline did not always fully erode 
the bump in producer returns arising from increased 
yields, and that both producer and consumer welfare 
in the United States increases in two out of three 
future climate projections. 

Projections suggesting that climate changes 
in temperate regions will increase yields in 
agriculturally important regions such as the Corn 
Belt are consistent with the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 2007b) assessment 
that moderate climate change will likely increase 
yields of North American rain-fed agriculture and 
its more general projection that crop productivity 
will increase slightly at mid to high latitudes for 
local mean temperature increases of up to 1 to 3C, 
but are inconsistent with the results of other studies 
concluding that recent patterns of climate change 
have already had adverse effects on corn and soybean 
production in agriculturally important regions 
(Lobell and Asner 2003; Kucharik and Serbin 2008; 
Ainsworth and Ort 2010). In fact, the net effects of 
climate change on average U.S. yields will vary by 
crop and be sensitive to both the effect of the climate 
projection selected and to regional shifts in crop 
acreage and irrigation practices that arise through 
market adjustments responding to effects on yield 
(Sands and Edmonds 2005; Izaurralde et al. 2011; 
Malcolm et al. 2012). In their analysis of the effects 
of climate change on crop insurance, Beach et al. 
(2010) projected increasing average national yields 
for crops such as barley, hay, oats, rye, and hard red 
winter wheat; decreasing average national yields 
for cotton, grapefruit, oranges, potatoes, soft white 
wheat, and Durum wheat; and mixed yield-effect 
results for corn, rice, silage, sorghum, soybeans, 
sugarcane, and hard red spring wheat, depending on 
the climate scenario used. 

Yield effects are a critical determinant of economic 
impact estimates, but yield projections under climate 
change projections are highly uncertain. Estimates 
of effects may misrepresent likely yield because 
most analyses have not included a comprehensive 
treatment of the stress factors arising from climate 
change that can affect yields (see Chapter 4 of this 
report). Studies often focus on the effects of a subset 
of direct stress factors, usually changes in average 
temperature and precipitation, while excluding the 
potential direct effects of other changing climate 
conditions, such as ozone exposure and solar 
radiation. Most studies also fail to consider the 
additional effects of indirect stress factors, such 
as changes in pest, weed, and disease pressure, 
arising from community-scale, agro-ecological 
adjustments to changing climate (Gornall et al. 
2011). Management strategies to deal with changing 
biotic stress can significantly affect crop and 
livestock production costs; a failure to consider such 
costs may overstate farms financial viability in the 
face of changing climate conditions. Although few 
such studies have estimated the effects of indirect 
stressors on crop productivity and management 
costs, available research has shown that these have 
a significant effect on the economic estimates of 
climate change within crop agricultural sectors 
(Malcolm et al. 2012). 

Economic impact results are also highly sensitive 
to whether and how yield-enhancing effects of 
atmospheric on crop yields are considered in 
the analysis (Sands and Edmonds 2005; Reilly 
et al. 2007; Cline 2007; ). Nevertheless, only a 
limited number of studies have assessed the yield 
implications of CO2 fertilization across crops under 
actual growing conditions; its effects, particularly 
in the presence of interacting changes in other 
factors such as temperature and soil moisture, are 
therefore highly uncertain (Adams et al. 1995; Long 
et al. 2005; Tubiello et al. 2007a; Gornall et al. 
2010). Sands and Edmonds (2005) found that when 
uncertain CO2 fertilization effects were excluded 
from the calculation of crop-yield effects, crop 

Chapter 6 


yields in the United States declined under the three 
climate scenarios they explored, as did indicators 
of both U.S. consumer and producer welfare. Such 
uncertainty about effects on crops translates into 
substantial uncertainty about economic impacts as 
well. 

Because climate is projected to continue changing 
throughout the 21st Century, yield and economic 
impact assessment results are sensitive to the time 
horizon used in the analysis and to the rate of change 
assumed by the climate projection(s) relied upon for 
the analysis. Global analyses of the effects of climate 
change on Gross Domestic Product (GDP) that 
are not limited to the agricultural sector often find 
near-term economic benefits associated with modest 
changes in climate that are followed by losses further 
in the future as temperatures continue to increase 
(Hitz and Smith 2004; Tol 2009). Several researchers 
have argued that crop productivity is likely to follow 
a similar pattern for several major crops (Parry 
et al. 2004; Schlenker and Roberts 2009) or that 
changing conditions are already creating a drag on 
global crop yields (Lobell and Field 2007; Lobell 
et al. 2011). Easterling et al. (2007) projected that 
crop productivity would begin to decline, even in 
temperate regions, when temperature increases 
exceed 1 to 3 C (1.8-5.4 F). Burke et al. (2011) 
project that both corn yields and farm profits would 
decline under a large range of climate projections 
in the United States for time ranges in the mid- and 
late-21st Century. In a hedonic farmland value 
regression for dryland acreage in the United States, 
Schlenker et al. (2005) estimate annual losses of 
$5-5.3 billion under a 5F increase in temperature 
and an 8% precipitation increase. 

Uncertainty in climate projections is therefore 
a critical element of crop and economic impact 
uncertainty (Adams et al. 1995; Sands and Edmonds 
2005; Burke et al. 2011; Malcolm et al. 2012). 
Nevertheless, both effects on crops and economic 
assessment efforts have been slow to develop the 
tools necessary to accommodate climate uncertainty. 
Burke et al. (2011) argue that although more 
than 20 climate models are regularly used by the 
climate change community, none of which have 
been determined to be more reliable than others for 
long-term climate projections, the median number 
of model projections used for economic, political, 
or social impact studies is generally two models. 
Furthermore, Adams et al. (2003) find that applying 
climatological projections at a finer spatial scale in 
determining effects on crop yield can substantially 
change estimates of a set of producer and consumer 
welfare measures, with finer scale data generally 
leading to reduced benefits or greater damages 
relative to a coarser scale analysis. The failure of 
economic impact estimates to capture the uncertainty 
generated by choice of climate projections, as 
well as application scale and downscaling method, 
artificially constrains the uncertainty associated with 
the impact estimates themselves. Greater attention to 
methods of quantifying and tracking multiple sources 
of uncertainty is required in climate change studies 
(Lobell and Burke 2008; Challinor et al. 2009; 
Soussana et al. 2010; Winkler et al. 2010). 

Sensitivity of Economic Impact 
Estimates 
to Scope of Analysis 

One of the most significant limitations in U.S. 
economic impact assessment is confining the scope 
of analysis to a consideration of the effects of climate 
change on domestic yields. Effects on regional yields 
alone are generally a poor predictor of regional 
welfare effects because domestic markets are highly 
interconnected with international markets, which 
will also be responding to yield and production 
changes worldwide. International trade mediates a 
larger, global response to highly decentralized yield 
and production changes, causing adjustments in 
world prices and trade patterns that can be equally 
important in affecting the domestic welfare measures 
being calculated (Adams et al. 1995; Hertel et al. 
2010a). Changes in relative productivity by region, 
and the price and trade effects arising in response, 
are therefore a critical determinant of the economic 
and welfare effects of climate change (Reilly et al. 
2007; Hertel et al. 2010a; Winkler et al. 2010). 

Assessments assuming a generally positive U.S. 
yield effect from climate change, for instance, when 
looking at U.S. yield effects in isolation from the rest 
of the world, suggest that domestic yield increases 
could stimulate supply and depress prices, with 
positive welfare implications for consumers and 
mixed implications for producers. The functioning 
of world markets, however, ensures that the actual 
effects of climate change on domestic consumers and 
producers will depend on what is happening to yields 
in the rest of the world and on the associated effects 
on world production and world price. If global yield 
effects are generally negative, they can drive global 
prices up despite domestic yield increases; the 
resulting price increases can benefit U.S. producers 
through increased return for their product, but U.S. 
consumer welfare is depressed by the global-marketmediated 
price increase (Reilly et al. 2003; Sands 
and Edmonds 2005). On the other hand, if net global 
yield effects for a given crop are also positive, then 

Chapter 6 

Because climate is 
projected to continue 
changing throughout 
the 21st century, yield 
and economic impact 
assessment results are 
sensitive to the time 
horizon used in the 
analysis and to the rate of 
change assumed by the 
climate projection(s) relied 
upon for the analysis. 


world yield effects can further lower world and 
domestic prices and push benefits associated with 
price changes even more in favor of consumers. 

In countries that experience yield declines, producer 
returns may therefore increase if rising global prices 
are sufficient to offset the adverse income effects 
of reduced yields (Reilly et al. 2007; Hertel et al. 
2010a). Consumers, on the other hand, always suffer 
welfare losses from reduced availability of food and 
increased prices associated with declining yields 
(Hertel et al. 2010b); in developing countries, certain 
non-agricultural demographics, such as the urban 
labor strata and the non-agricultural self-employed, 
can be highly vulnerable to increased poverty arising 
from higher food prices (Hertel et al. 2010a; Hertel et 
al. 2010b). 

The potential for climate change to alter the 
variability of production returns, as well as relative 
variability across crops or livestock enterprises, 
is also likely to affect farmers risk management 
decisions, making climate risk management an 
increasingly important driver of production and 
adaptation decisions (Chen et al. 2004; Howden et 
al. 2007). A risk-averse farmer can be expected to 
allocate more acreage to crops with relatively low 
variability, for instance. Climate change adaptation 
behavior may therefore include shifts among crops 
based on differences in climate change effects on 
yield variability and co-variance of yields across 
crops (Isik and Devadoss 2006). Adams et al. 
(2003) found that adaptation behavior leads to 
greater welfare gains when climate change effects 
on yield variability are considered, in part because 
adaptation behaviors will help mitigate increases in 
yield variability due to climate change. Other risk 
management options that may play an increasingly 
important role in farmers decisionmaking under 
conditions of increased yield variability include crop 
insurance, expansion of irrigation or other inputs, and 
adoption of moisture-conserving tillage operations 
and other best management practices (Knutson et al. 
2011; Darwin 2004; Beach et al. 2010). Economic 
impacts of climate change will therefore also be 
sensitive to the availability, effectiveness, and costs 
of adaptation measures adopted in response to yield 
variability as well as to those adopted in response 
to changes in average yields (Adams et al. 2003). 
Because little information is available on projected 
changes in climate and yield variability, however, 
such considerations have not been integrated into 
economic impact analyses. 

The scope of analysis is also defined by the number 
of sectors included in the impact analysis. Existing 
analyses of agricultural have focused on climate 
changes effects on cropland agriculture with some 
expansion, often in the case of simulation modeling 
efforts, to include the effects of changing feed prices 
or competition for pasture land on the livestock 
sector (Malcolm et al. 2012; Reilly et al. 2003). 
Although climate change will also have direct 
effects on both the productivity and management 
costs of the livestock and dairy sectors, through 
pathways such as lowered feed efficiency, reduced 
forage productivity, reduced reproduction rates, and 
costs associated with modifying livestock housing 
to reduce thermal stress, relatively few economic 
impact studies have estimated these costs. In the 
absence of such estimates, most system-wide 
economic impact assessments, with few exceptions 
(i.e., Adams et al. 1999; Reilly et al. 2003), do not 
account for the potential direct costs and productivity 
effects of climate change on livestock, forage, and 
rangeland production (Antle and Capalbo 2010; 
Izaurralde et al. 2011). Furthermore, crop sector 
studies have focused largely on the implications of 
climate change for commodity crop production, with 
less attention paid to market and revenue impacts 
in specialty crop sectors (such as fruits, vegetables, 
tree nuts, and nursery crops), though in 2010 such 
crops accounted for roughly 37% of all U.S. cash 
receipts for farm crops (Antle and Capalbo, 2010; 
ERS 2012). 

Interactions within agricultural sectors and across 
other sectors of the economy will also be an 
important determinant of aggregate economic 
impact, as climate change will directly affect 
cropland, forestry, and livestock (as well as all 
other economic sectors) simultaneously. However, 
only a small subset of studies has looked at the 
effects of changing relative productivity across 
sectors on resource allocation decisions such as 
shifting land use among crop, livestock, and timber 
production (Darwin et al. 1995; Alig et al. 2002; 
Sands and Edmonds 2005; Reilly et al. 2007). 
Reilly et al. (2007) argue that because agricultural 
adaptation requires shifting resources into or out of 
the agricultural sector, the full economic impact of 
those changes can only be assessed using economywide 
measures of well-being that take into account 
aggregate consumption across all goods and services. 

Other issues of scope are implicit in the methodology 
used to estimate changes in environmental indicators 
arising as a result of climate change. Economic 
impact estimates of climate change are often derived 
by comparing economic outcomes at some future 
date under climate change to outcomes under the 
current climate (Antle and Capalbo 2012). The 

Chapter 6 


regional costs (or benefits) of climate change are 
measured as the differences in welfare or revenue (or 
other economic indicator of interest) between these 
two points of comparison. This method, however, 
fails to take into account the costs associated with 
transitioning from the current to the future position 
 including, for instance, the costs of developing 
the transportation, distribution, and irrigation 
infrastructure necessary to support new patterns of 
agricultural production  or how such adjustment 
costs are affected by the rate and variability with 
which climate conditions change over time (Quiggin 
and Horowitz 2003; Patt et al. 2010). Quiggin and 
Horowitz (2003) argue that adjustment costs are 
likely to be the greatest element of cost in response 
to climate change, but they are largely ignored in 
sector-level economic impact studies (Patt et al. 
2010, Antle and Capalbo 2010; Hertel et al. 2010). 

Sensitivity of Economic Impact 
Estimates 
to Socioeconomic and 
Technology 
Projections and Treatment 
of Adaptation Constraints 

Because likely future responses to climate change 
depend upon a wide array of uncertain variables, 
the climate change community has relied heavily 
on the development of future scenarios, or plausible 
narratives describing how the future might unfold 
with respect to characteristics such as socioeconomic 
variables, technological and environmental 
conditions, and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
(Moss et al. 2010). The IPCC, for instance, created 
a storyline describing population, economic 
growth, technology and clean energy adoption, 
and agriculture and land use to inform each of the 
potential emissions scenarios used in its analyses 
(Nakicenovic et al. 2000). 

No such narratives have historically been available 
for more sector-specific input assumptions such as 
future crop and livestock productivity, farm policy, 
farm size, and input and output prices, however, 
so economic impact assessments generally assume 
that historical conditions or trends continue into 
the future. Smooth continuity is unlikely given 
the magnitude of disturbance to the agricultural 
system expected under a changing climate and the 
extended time horizon of many such analyses, so 
recent research has focused on developing a set of 
Representative Agricultural Pathways (RAPs) 
that expands the coverage of global socioeconomic 
scenarios to include more region-specific agricultural 
and economic development conditions relevant to 
agricultural modeling efforts. Such RAPs include 
assumptions about size of farm households, 
availability of agricultural labor, investments in 
transportation and communication infrastructure, 
price of fertilizer and seed inputs, and trade policy on 
agricultural exports (Claessen et al. 2012). Research 
studying the sensitivity of climate change effects to 
RAP specification in Kenya finds that estimates of 
climate change are highly sensitive to assumptions 
made about future socioeconomic and technological 
conditions, in part through differential implications 
for farm livelihood and technical and financial ability 
to adapt (Claessen et al. 2012). 

While limitations of scope were described above 
as a problem for generating robust estimations of 
the economic impacts arising from effects to and 
adaptation within the agricultural sector, trade-offs 
may exist between expanding economic analyses 
(i.e., considering effects within other sectors of 
the economy or world markets) and the ability 
to represent adaptation options and constraints 
effectively at the producer level. For instance, studies 
that look at international trade in a rigorous way are 
generally based on an analysis of highly aggregated 
data and regions; such models and methodologies 
are unable to capture the dynamics of potential 
adaptive responses at the farm level, such as changes 
in harvest in planting days or changes in capital 
equipment or infrastructure as farms within a region 
find it necessary to change their production methods. 

Few economic impact analyses in the United States 
have incorporated potential constraints to adaptation 
related to farm financing and credit availability, 
for instance, though research suggests that such 
constraints may be significant. Farmer members of 
a sustainable agriculture organization in Nebraska 
reported lack of capital as their largest perceived 
barrier to implementing drought risk-reduction 
practices (Knutson et al. 2011). In their analysis of 
dairy and specialty crop farms in the Northeastern 
United States, Wolfe et al. (2008) identify small 
family farms with little capital as those most 
vulnerable to climate change (Wolfe et al. 2008). 
In an analysis of adaptation capacity by production 
region, Antle et al. (2004) argue that areas with 
marginal financial and resource endowments, such 
as the Northern Plains, are especially vulnerable to 
climate change (Antle et al. 2004). In addition to 
technical and financial ability to adapt to changing 
average conditions, farm resilience to climate change 
is also a function of financial capacity to withstand 
increasing variability in production and returns, 
including catastrophic loss (Smit and Skinner 
2002; Beach et al. 2010). Such farm-level analyses 
emphasize the importance of complementing and 

Chapter 6 

In an analysis of 
adaptation capacity by 
production region, Antle 
et al. (2004) argue that 
areas with marginal 
financial and resource 
endowments, such as 
the Northern Plains, are 
especially vulnerable to 
climate change. 


informing economy- and sector-wide impact studies 
with more detailed analyses of the implications of the 
heterogeneity of farms and farmers in determining 
farm viability, and the potential for adaptation under 
a changing climate both within the United States and 
internationally (Claessen et al. 2012). 

Farmers adaptation decisions may also be 
constrained by elements of path dependency within 
the agricultural system (Vanloqueren and Baret 2009; 
Chhetri et al. 2010). Examples of path dependence 
include technological lock-in (e.g., arising from 
sunk machinery costs), social, economic, and 
cultural reinforcement of prevailing development 
paths, and lags in institutional response that might 
otherwise enable more rapid adoption of innovative 
technologies (Chhetri et al. 2010). Little research has 
been done on the potential effects of such constraints 
on the speed and efficiency of agricultural adaptation 
or on the resulting economic implications of such 
obstacles. Differences in farm-scale ability to absorb 
the costs associated with adaptation may also have 
implications for existing agricultural trends toward 
large-scale agricultural production and vertical 
integration in U.S. agriculture. 

The Changing Geography of Production 

The migration of crop production in response to 
climate change has been recognized as a likely 
adaptation mechanism since the early days of 
integrated assessment modeling (Adams et al. 1995; 
Darwin et al. 1995). Regional capacity for expanding 
agriculture or irrigated production will depend on 
resource constraints such as the availability of land 
and water (Darwin et al. 1995; Schlenker et al. 
2007). Large bands of uncertainty around future 
projections for regional precipitation change make 
it difficult to predict with precision regional changes 
in relative productivity, and estimates of net land 
brought into production as a result of climate change 
are mixed and highly sensitive to which models 
and climate assumptions or scenarios are used in 
the estimation (Zhang and Cai 2011; Malcolm et 
al. 2012). In general, however, studies estimate that 
arable land will increase at the higher latitudes, 
including Canada, Russia, Northern United States, 
and southern Argentina, and decrease in western 
Africa, Central America, western Asia, the South 
Central United States, and northern South America 
(Ramankutty et al. 2002; Zhang and Cai 2011). 
Fischer et al. (2005) estimate that by the 2080s, 
expansion of cropland in Southeast Asia will be 
particularly constrained due to land-use competition 
from other sectors combined with a lack of suitable 
agricultural land. 

Sensitivity of Economic Impact 
Estimates 
to Estimation Methodology 

Methods used for climate change assessment 
vary widely and have included expert opinion, 
statistical estimation using hedonic and production 
function approaches, and integrated assessment 
modeling (Schlenker et al. 2005). These assessment 
methodologies have differing capacities for reflecting 
adaptation options, allowing the adoption of 
adaptation technologies that dont yet exist, capturing 
the effects of market responses such as changes in 
the prices of inputs and outputs, and accommodating 
scope and scale considerations like those described 
above (Antle and Capalbo, 2010). 

Statistical estimation methods, for instance, use 
observed data on agricultural production and 
climate between regions to parameterize functional 
relationships between climate variables and 
production (or production value, or value of land 
used for production) (Adams et al. 1998). Projected 
climate effects can then be inferred by changing the 
input climate variables and observing a production 
change based on the historically derived relationship. 
Estimating future effects based on relationships 
observed in past data, however, cannot take into 
account the possibility of future technological 
changes that might fundamentally change production 
decisions and adaptation options. Such estimation 
methods are also highly sensitive to model structure. 
In an exploration of the hedonic estimation method 
 a widely used statistical methodology for impact 
assessment  Schlenker et al. (2005) demonstrate 
that pooling dryland and irrigation acreage in a single 
statistical model, as other authors have done, can 
yield biased estimates of economic impact because 
different explanatory variables are required for the 
different types of production system (Schlenker 
et al. 2005). When they run a hedonic climate 
change impact estimate for dryland acreage only, 
they predict unambiguously negative effects on 
U.S. agriculture from climate change. The hedonic 
estimation method has also been criticized as highly 
sensitive to seemingly minor model structure choices 
related to weighting schemes, dummy variables, or 
control variables (Deschenes and Greenstone 2007). 

A second major approach to economic impact 
assessment is the structural approach, which 
employs integrated assessment models to measure 
the economic consequences of climate change 
(Adams et al. 1998). Integrated assessment models 
have been broadly defined as any model which 
combines scientific and socio-economic aspects of 
climate change primarily for the purpose of assessing 

Chapter 6 


policy options for climate change control (Kelly 
and Kolstad 1999). Over the past few decades, 
integrated assessment modeling efforts have used 
model ensembles from several different disciplines 
to tie together the dynamics of climate effects at 
various scales for a broader picture of projected 
agricultural system response and effects. These 
analyses allow for the introduction of a wide range 
of potential adaptation behaviors, though that 
flexibility is limited by the structure and scale of the 
component models, as well as by the need to specify 
for newly introduced adaptation options cost and 
benefit information that may be unknown or highly 
uncertain. 

Integrated assessments of climate change effects 
must synthesize information on dynamics and 
relationships that occur at multiple scales, identifying 
and capturing relevant driving forces and feedbacks 
without getting bogged down in unwarranted 
precision at any point in the system (Challinor et 
al. 2009; Polsky and Easterling 2001). Finding the 
appropriate balance of generality and specificity in 
region and scale is challenging, as are the technical 
details associated with using information produced 
at one scale (i.e., field-scale crop dynamics) in 
an analysis at a completely different scale (i.e., 
international trade modeling) (Challinor et al. 2009). 

These modeling efforts have increased the 
sophistication with which the dynamics of the 
climate-crop-international economy nexus can be 
represented, but many are now confronting a lack 
of reliable data in critical areas such as soil types, 
land use, and hydrological processes worldwide. 
Furthermore, determining the validity and robustness 
of results emerging from such efforts has been 
hampered by the lack of consistent data, model 
structure, and input assumptions across modeling 
efforts (see sidebar below). Technical research needs 
related to the synthesis of information at multiple 
scales include improved understanding of the 
implications of different methods of downscaling and 
upscaling information in climate change assessments, 
and more sophisticated model linkages to more 
accurately reflect the effect of factors that influence 
adaptation options and behavior at multiple scales. 

International Effects and Food Security 
Implications 

Using a linked series of 34 national and regional 
agricultural economic models, Fischer et al. (2005) 
estimate that under a range of climate scenarios 
evaluated in 2080, agricultural gross domestic 
product (GDP) increases in most developed countries 
and decreases in most developing countries (with the 
exception of Latin America). In North America, gains 
to agricultural GDP range from 3 to 13%, depending 
on the climate scenario (Fischer et al. 2005), 
however the effects of climate change are generally 
projected to be more severe in poor developing 
countries (Winters et al. 1998; Parry et al. 2004; 
Mertz et al. 2009; Hertel et al. 2010a). Productivity 
may be more negatively affected because many 
developing countries are already at the upper end 
of their temperature ranges, and precipitation is 
not expected to increase as it is in many temperate 
regions (Easterling et al. 2007; Mertz et al. 2009). 
Overall economic impacts may be more severe 
because developing countries rely on agriculture for 
a much greater proportion of their national income 
and employment than do developed countries (Mertz 
et al. 2009). 

Furthermore, relative capacity for adaptation varies 
by region, country, sector, and crop, and is therefore 

Chapter 6 


The Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement Project 
(AgMIP) 

 AgMIP is advancing the integrated assessment modeling effort by bringing together climate scientists, 
crop scientists, soil scientists, and social and behavioral scientists from around the world to create 
common protocols and compare climate projections, crop modeling projections, and production 
and trade results across research efforts. These comparisons will be used to better understand and 
isolate sources of variation and uncertainty across analysis tools and scales, as well as to improve the 
compatibility and availability of the spatially explicit climate, resource, and yield data necessary for such 
analyses. Through improved tools and data for characterizing world food security implications of climate 
change, AGMIP hopes to provide substantially improved inputs into international research efforts and 
decision-making processes about climate change impacts and risks. 


itself a factor in determining how the economic 
impacts of climate change will be distributed across 
and within agricultural sectors worldwide. Tol (2009) 
suggests that low-income countries are typically 
less able to adapt to climate change both because of a 
lack of resources and less capable institutions. Such 
differences in relative adaptive capacity, together 
with differential climate change effects on yields, 
may entrench and exacerbate existing production and 
consumption discrepancies between developed and 
developing countries (Fischer et al. 2005; Tubiello 
et al. 2007a; Parry et al. 2005). Even future climate 
scenarios with mild to inconsequential aggregate 
global effects on food production may result in 
severe implications for the food security of the 
worlds poorest and most vulnerable populations. 

Concerns about whether future food supply can meet 
the demands of a growing population have been 
raised independently of climate change issues, often 
citing issues related to increasing meat consumption 
and increasing use of grain for biofuel production 
(Edgerton 2009; Funk and Brown 2009). Questions 
about the evolution of agriculture under changing 
climate conditions, however has added several new 
levels of risk and uncertainty to those analyses. The 
food security implications of climate change vary 
significantly according to the assumptions made 
about level of development and population growth 
into the future that underlie emissions trajectories 
used in the climate scenarios, for instance (Fischer 
et al. 2005). As with economic impacts, the food 
security implications of climate change are also 
significantly different across regions (Funk and 
Brown 2009; Hertel et al. 2010a; Acevedo 2011). 

Climate change in the near term is not expected to 
significantly affect aggregate global food production 
(Rosenzweig and Parry 1994; Darwin et al. 1995; 
Parry et al. 2004). Studies have consistently 
suggested that climate change is not a significant 
food security risk for the United States and other 
developed countries in the near to medium term 
(Adams et al. 1995; Cline 2007; UNDP 2007). This 
dynamic is only partly due to the yield assumptions 
associated with climate change assessments in the 
United States. Research suggests that production 
in the United States is much more variable across 
possible climate projections than is consumption; 
trade patterns adjust to keep U.S. consumption fairly 
stable despite effects on production (Sands and 
Edmonds 2005). 

Concerns about food security are more acute for 
other regions of the world, however. Regional 
differences in yields and adaptation capacity 
are expected to result in regional differences in 
vulnerability to effects of hunger and poverty, with 
particularly severe implications for tropical semi-arid 
developing countries (Parry et al. 2004; Fischer et 
al. 2005; Parry et al. 2005). Almost 90% of world 
hunger is concentrated in Asia, the Pacific, and Sub- 
Saharan Africa (Acevedo 2011). These regions are 
particularly vulnerable to climate change; by the 
end of the 21st century, there is a high probability 
(>90%) that normal growing season temperatures in 
the tropics and the subtropics will exceed the hottest 
temperatures on record for those regions from 1900 
to 2006 (Battisti and Naylor 2009). 

The production and calorie consumption implications 
for these regions are significant. Fischer et al. (2005) 
estimate a global increase in undernourishment of 
15% by 2080 under a worst case high population 
development scenario (A2). Using a statistical 
analysis of historical relationships between harvest 
and temperature/precipitation for major crops in 
12 food-insecure regions, Lobell et al. (2008) 
identified south Asia and southern Africa as 
two regions with a high probability of suffering 
production losses to crops important to large, foodinsecure 
populations. These results are consistent 
with several other studies that project negative effects 
of climate change on productivity and food security 
in Africa and south Asia (Parry et al. 2005; Schlenker 
and Lobell 2010; Challinor et al. 2007; IPCC 2007a; 
Funk and Brown 2009). Hare et al. (2011) review 
a number of studies projecting significant risks to 
food security in south Asia, Sahelian and northern 
Africa, and Russia with mean global temperature 
increases of 2C (Hare et al. 2011). Funk and Brown 
(2009) estimate that interactions between drought 
exacerbated by climate change and declining 
agricultural capacity (including the effects of 
population growth) could increase demand for World 
Food Program humanitarian assistance by 83% by 
2030 in the absence of agricultural development that 
mitigates effects on yields. 

Other climate-related market and political dynamics 
may further increase the vulnerability of poorer 
countries. Yu et al. (2011) report that trade policy 
changes resulting from increasing food prices (such 
as the export bans or export restrictions observed 
in 2007-2008) have served to further increase food 
prices, particularly for the poorer, food-deficit 
countries/regions, causing them to lower their 
imports of agricultural and food commodities. 
Such trade disruptions can increase the risk of food 
insecurity among vulnerable populations. Other 
aspects of the food supply system, including the 
distribution infrastructure, demand factors, and 

Chapter 6 

Studies have consistently 
suggested that climate 
change is not a 
significant food security 
risk for the United States 
and other developed 
countries in the near to 
medium term. 


other elements related to access and utilization 
may also be affected by climate change, however 
little research has been done on elements of food 
supply and security beyond global food production 
(Schmidhuber and Tubiello 2007; Jarvis et al. 2011). 
Like economic impact assessments, food security 
assessments have also focused on the implications 
of shifts in mean climate conditions and excluded 
the effects on production of increased incidence 
of extreme events like drought and flooding 
(Shmidhuber and Tubiello 2007). 

While developing countries may be particularly 
vulnerable to climate change effects, substantial 
gaps between crop yield potential and actual yields 
(yield gaps) in those countries may represent 
an opportunity to offset negative climate change 
effects through investments that narrow yield gaps 
on existing croplands (Lobell et al. 2009; Schlenker 
and Lobell 2010). Furthermore, Tilman et al. (2011) 
suggest that strategic intensification of agriculture 
that targets yield gaps and elevates yields on existing 
croplands of under-yielding nations can significantly 
reduce the potential environmental effects associated 
with meeting 2050 global crop demands. 

Climate Change Effects and the 
Environment 

Meeting food demand in the future will involve 
multiple strategies, including intensification of 
production on existing land, expansion of agricultural 
land, and reduction of waste along the food supply 
chain (Pfister et al. 2011). Reliance on specific 
adaptation mechanisms will depend on regional 
patterns of climate change; however, intensification 
and expansion of agriculture can have significant 
environmental implications. A multitude of concerns 
are linked with climate change, including increased 
water stress and competition with downstream 
aquatic systems, increased GHG emissions 
associated with land clearing, increased pesticide 
use, increased nutrient loading, and loss of natural 
systems and the ecosystem services they provide 
(Malcolm et al. 2012; Reilly et al. 2003; Pfister et al. 
2011; Tilman et al. 2011; Antle and Capalbo 2010). 

Economic impact studies generally do an inadequate 
job of addressing such environmental concerns. 
Antle and Capalbo (2010) concisely articulate the 
problem: Due to both data and model limitations, 
ecosystem services have not been incorporated into 
integrated assessment studies and cannot be linked 
to reduced-form statistical studies that do not model 
land use changes and other aspects of management 
decisions. However, some economic impact 
studies have explicitly linked climate change and 
adaptation with environmental effects. Malcolm et 
al. (2012) found that the changes in environmental 
indicators of erosion and nutrient loss associated 
with changing agricultural patterns in response to 
climate change were disproportionately larger than 
the increase in agricultural acreage experienced; 
climate changes were therefore projected to result in 
some combination of an intensification of agriculture 
(and environmental effects) on existing acreage and 
an expansion of production onto acres with higherthan-
average environmental effects. Antle et al. 
(2004) also found that shifting production patterns 
in response to changing climate conditions within 
a dryland, grain-producing region in Montana had 
substantial effects on soil carbon stocks. 

Potential environmental effects are associated with 
both intensification of agriculture and expansion of 
cropland. Identifying and incentivizing the adoption 
of environmentally friendly management practices 
that deal effectively with climate-change-related 
challenges, such as shifting diseases and pests and 
increased incidence of flooding and other extreme 
events, will be a critical and challenging element 
of a sustainable agricultural adaptation strategy 
for climate change. Environmental effects may 
also be reduced through adaptation and agronomic 
advancements that result in increased yields per acre 
(Burney, 2010; Tilman, 2011). Pfister et al. (2011) 
suggest that incorporating environmental affects 
into decisionmaking may fundamentally change 
agricultural systems by directing crop production 
toward areas where environmental effects from 
production are relatively low. 

Climate Change, Economic Resilience, 
and Extreme Weather Events 

Economic approaches to climate change impact 
assessment are just beginning to make use of 
concepts of system resilience and adaptability that 
have traditionally been more widely developed in the 
ecological literature (Antle et al. 2010; Chapter 7 of 
this volume). A farms economic resilience to climate 
change refers to its ability to survive a large climaterelated 
economic shock, such as those associated 
with sudden reductions in output or increases in 
input prices (Antle and Capalbo 2010). A farms 
capacity for adaptation and its economic resilience 
are inextricably linked. Both are functions of a farms 
access to the natural, physical, human, and financial 

Chapter 6 


resources necessary to absorb economic shocks in the 
short-term, while simultaneously responding to longterm 
shifts in growing conditions and market prices. 

Economic impact assessments focusing on the 
long-term adaptability of the agricultural sector 
have nevertheless been largely unable to address 
the challenges and implications associated with 
short-term resilience of farm production enterprises 
under a changing climate. There is little information 
available on the relationship between climate change 
and the incidence of critical economic thresholds 
related to profitability and financial sustainability 
for different farm sectors and types of operations. 
Climate change analysis has generally focused on the 
effects of mean changes in climate variables rather 
than on the effects of variability and extreme events, 
due in large part to a lack of data on the variability 
associated with the climate projections derived from 
general circulation models (GCMs). Nevertheless, as 
is the case for effects on crop productivity (Tubiello 
et al. 2007a; Gornall et al. 2010), farm financial 
vulnerabilty and resilience may be more sensitive to 
the magnitude and timing of extreme events than to 
the effects of mean growing season changes under 
a changing climate. Extreme events may directly 
affect crops at critical developmental stages, such as 
flowering, for instance, or may reduce the efficiency 
of farm inputs by reducing the flexibility of timing 
of farm operations and applications (Tubiello et al. 
2007b; Hatfield et al. 20011). Livestock and dairy 
production may also be more affected by changes in 
number of days of extreme heat than by adjustments 
of average temperature. Catastrophic crop or 
livestock losses are likely to affect the financial 
viability of production enterprises in a fundamentally 
different way than moderate losses over longer 
periods of time. 

Attention is increasingly turning in both biophysical 
and economic research arenas to likely changes in 
the timing and variability of climate conditions, 
with particular attention to the incidence of extreme 
events such as drought or flooding. Rosenzweig 
et al. (2002) estimated that, under climate change, 
losses to corn production in the United States 
from precipitation extremes would be expected to 
increase substantially and by 2030 could average $3 
billion per year. Such events may represent critical 
economic thresholds for farming operations and 
compromise their ability  and the ability of the 
agriculture sector as a whole  to engage in longterm 
adaptation. 

Extreme Events 

 

Climate change projections suggest a likely increase 
in regional and seasonal variability of temperature 
and precipitation. There is a spatial and temporal 
component to these changes across the United States. 
Karl et al. (2009) showed that precipitation events 
would change in frequency and intensity with a 
projected increase in spring precipitation, particularly 
in the Northeast and Midwest, and a decline in the 
U.S. Southwest; summer precipitation is projected to 
decrease. 

Temperature trends will likely be more uniform than 
those of precipitation; projections generally call 
for more occurrences of heat events, or episodes 
that exceed the expected average temperatures by 
3 to 5C (Karl et al. 2009). In a recent analysis, 
Munasinghe et al. (2011) showed that the frequency 
of high temperature extremes increased 10-fold in the 
first three decades of the 20th century (1900-1929), 
and in the last decade (1999-2008). The change in 
frequency of high temperatures was greater in the 
tropics than in the higher latitudes, and the frequency 
of extremes was greater in the daily minimum 
temperatures compared to the daily maximum 
temperatures. Increases in temperature are also often 
associated with lack of precipitation, potentially 
leading to more drought occurrences. 

Some evidence exists that the United States is 
already experiencing an increased incidence of 
extreme weather events. A compilation of the 
economic impact of extreme events with an 
economic impact in excess of $1 billion shows an 
increase in this extent of economic damage over the 
last 30 years, as shown in Table 6.2 (NOAA NCDC 
2011). The regions affected by extreme events vary 
across the years both in economic impact and spatial 
extent. Across the United States from 1980 through 
2011 there has been an increase in the number 
of events with significant economic impact. An 
increased occurrence of extreme events associated 
with climate change across the United States will 
likely lead to an increased incidence of weather 
events with significant economic impact. 

Patterns already evident in crop insurance payments, 
workable field days, and soil erosion provide a 
glimpse into the implications for agriculture of an 
increased incidence of extreme events. The following 
analyses focus on Iowa as a case study but are 
typical of the upper Midwest in terms of the expected 
outcomes. Because of regional heterogeneity in the 
expected effects of climate change, the implications 
of climate change may be quite different for other 
regions within the United States. 

Chapter 6 

 farm financial 
vulnerabilty and resilience 
may be more sensitive to 
the magnitude and timing 
of extreme events than 
to the effects of mean 
growing season changes 
under a changing climate. 


Crop Insurance 

Extreme events trigger claims for crop insurance 
and claims in the United States have been made in 
response to drought (40%), excess moisture (25%), 
hail (5-10%), hurricane (5%), excess heat (<5%), 
and other causes (20%) (OECD-INEA-FAO 2010). 
An evaluation of the changes in Iowa crop insurance 
indemnities show that indemnities in the first decade 
of the 2000s far exceed those occurring during 1971- 
1999; 2001-2010 indemnities are 3.5 times those 
for the period 1971-2000 (Figure 6.1). Indemnities 
are paid out by crop insurance companies to farmers 
for losses occurring, for example, due to drought, 
flooding, or crop price declines. Several factors may 
have contributed to this trend, including changing 
frequency and intensity of weather extremes, 
increased acreage enrollment in crop insurance 
programs, and an accompanying reduction in reliance 
on ad hoc disaster payments. While future research 
is required to clarify the relative importance of 
these factors, insight into changing crop insurance 

Chapter 6 

Table 6.2. Extreme event, location, and economic impact for the United States. Source: NCDC, 2011. 

Year Event Location Sector Economic Impact 
(2011 $) 
2011 Upper Missouri River 
Flooding 
Upper Midwest (MT,ND,SD, IA, 
KS, MO) 
Agriculture 2.0 Billion 
2011 Mississippi River 
Flooding 
Lower Mississippi River (AR, TN, 
LA, MS, MO) 
Agriculture 1.9 Billion (3-4 Billion 
total) 
2011 Heat/Drought Southern Plains/Southwest Agriculture 10.0 Billion 
2009 Drought Southwest/Great Plains (TX, OK, 
KS, AZ, NM, CA) 
Agriculture 5.3 Billion 
2008 Drought South and West (CA, TX, GA, TN, 
NC, SC) 
Agriculture 2.0 Billion 
2008 Flooding Upper Midwest (IA, IL, IN, MO, 
MN, NE, WI) 
Agriculture 15.8 Billion Total 
2007 Drought Great Plains and Eastern U.S. Agriculture 5.5 Billion 
2007 Freeze East and Midwest U.S. Agriculture 2.2 Billion 
2007 Freeze California Agriculture 1.5 Billion 
2006 Drought Central U.S. Agriculture 6.7 Billion 
2005 Drought Central US (AR,IL,IN, MO, 
OH,WI) 
Agriculture 1.2 Billion 
2003 Storms and Hail Southern Plains and lower MS 
valley 
Agriculture 1.6 Billion 
2002 Drought 30 states, western, Great Plains, 
and eastern U.S. 
Agriculture 12.5 Billion 
2000 Heat/Drought South-Central and Southeastern 
U.S. 
Agriculture 5.2 Billion 
1999 Heat/Drought Eastern U.S. Agriculture 1.4 Billion 
1998 Freeze California Agriculture 3.5 Billion 
1998 Heat/Drought TX/OK to the Carolinas Agriculture 8.3-12.4 Billion 
1995-1996 Drought TX/OK Agriculture 7.2 Billion 
1993 Flooding Upper Midwest All Sectors 32.8 Billion 
1993 Drought Southeastern U.S. Agriculture 1.6 Billion 
1990 Freeze California Agriculture 5.9 Billion 
1989 Drought Upper Great Plains (ND,SD) Agriculture 1.4 Billion 
1988 Drought Central and Eastern U.S. Agriculture 76.4 Billion 
1986 Heat/Drought Southeastern U.S. Agriculture 2.1-3.1 Billion 
1985 Freeze Florida Agriculture 2.5 Billion 
1983 Freeze Florida Agriculture 4.5 Billion 
1980 Heat/Drought Central to Eastern U.S. Agriculture 54.8 Billion 
programs is gained by examining the relative fraction 
of indemnities from different causes. 

Crop indemnities and their causes are examined for 
Iowa for 1971-2010. A shift has occurred in primary 
causes of climate and weather extremes. In the 
1970s and 1980s, indemnities for hail and drought 
accounted for 70-80% of total indemnity (Figures 6.2 
and 6.3). Drought remains an important factor, but is 
exceeded by indemnity claims for excessive moisture 
and flood (Figures 6.4 and 6.5). The reduction in 
the fraction of indemnity from hail claims likely is 
an indicator of shifts in crop insurance policy and 
enrollment in crop insurance programs. Since little 
evidence exists of a decrease in hail frequency, the 
implication is that increased penetration of drought 
and excessive wetness/flood has increased exposure 
of the crop insurance industry to rain and drought 
events. If we assume farm bill changes to insurance 
coverage have not disproportionately increased the 
likelihood of payouts (or insurance payments) due 
to either drought or excessive wetness/flood, then 
the relative fractions of indemnity from excessive 
wetness/flood and drought may be an indicator of 
changes in frequency of extreme wet and dry periods. 

The relationship between annual precipitation and 
fraction of indemnity paid out for drought, flood, 
and excessive wetness is examined in Figure 6.6. 
For precipitation levels below the annual average 
rainfall for Iowa (33.64 inches for the 1955- 
2010 period, which is the period of the indemnity 
database) there is generally a relatively high fraction 
of indemnity going to drought, with low fractions 
paid out due to flood and excess precipitation events. 
For precipitation levels above 1.8  1.3 inches/year, 
the fraction of indemnities paid out to drought and 
excess flood events increases markedly. 

Since the 1980s, many of the indemnity claims occur 
during individual years that can be described by a 
single climate extreme. During the 1980s, drought in 
the extreme years of 1988 and 1989 accounts for 30% 
and 19%, respectively, of the decades total indemnity 
claims. In the 1990s, the 1993 flood accounts for 
24% of the decade total. In the 2000s, the drought of 
2003 and flood of 2008 account for 21% and 45%, 
respectively, of the decade total. However, in 2011 
(which ranks third in crop indemnities for the years 
between 2001 and 2011, behind 2003 drought and 
2008 flood), crop indemnity in Iowa includes claims 
for both excessive wetness in the spring and drought 
during the summer. Climate model projections for 
the mid-21st century project a continuing trend of 
wet springs, while also maintaining the potential for 
summer drought. Other hybrid years occurred prior 
to 2011 (Table 6.3), but the total indemnity in 2011 
represents from 2 times to 24 times the indemnity of 
the 8 other hybrid years since 1971. 

Chapter 6 

Fig. 6.1. Crop insurance indemnity (unadjusted dollars) in 
Iowa 19712010. Source: USDA-RMA. 


Table 6.3. For Iowa, Hybrid Drought: Excessive Wetness Years since 1971, Total Indemnity, and Ratio to 2011. Source: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Risk Management Agency. Cause of Loss Historical Data Files. Accessed from http://www.rma. 
usda.gov/data/cause.html on 3/19/12. 

Iowa Hybrid Drought Index 
Occurrence of Excessive 
Wetness by Year 
Fraction of total indemnity for 
drought:wetness 
Total Indemnity 
(US$) 
Ratio to 2011 
1984 48%:25% 18003685 5.0 
1985 40%:23% 12053131 15.6 
1991 26%:46% 12053131 7.4 
1992 28%:20% 12053131 7.4 
1997 32%:30% 4881255 18.4 
2001 31%:43% 48888822 1.8 
2005 42%:16% 12893619 7.0 
2007 20%:24% 16234329 5.5 
2011 22%:24% 89782894 1.0 
Chapter 6 

Figs. 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5. Fraction of total indemnity by cause for 19711980, 19811990, 19912000, and 20012010. 
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Risk Management Agency. Cause of Loss Historical Data Files. Accessed from 
http://www.rma.usda.gov/data/cause.html on 3/19/12. 


Fig. 6.3 

Fig. 6.2 


Fig. 6.4 

Fig. 6.5 


Projections of rainfall change are placed in context 
of changes since 1873 to provide an indication of 
how indemnities may be affected. Figure 6.7 shows 
the annual Iowa rainfall and 30-year average rainfall 
(computed in accordance with World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO) standards). The most recent 
30-year periods (1981-2010, 1971-2000, 1961- 
1990) show an upward trend of 30-year average 
precipitation, increasing by 9% to 35.1 inches from 
1981 to 2010, up from the 1951 to 1980 average of 
32.1 inches. Prior to 1951-1990, fluctuations in the 
30-year average were much smaller, ranging from 
30.7 to 32.0 inches. Projections of change in 30-year 
average annual precipitation for Iowa show a range 
of percent change from -10% to +20%, with a large 
fraction of projections experiencing between a 5% 
and 15% increase. Projections at the low end return 
Iowas annual precipitation back to that experienced 
prior to the 1961-1990 period. Projections at the high 
end continue the recent trend in precipitation increase 
with roughly the same rate of change. 

Since warmer temperature occurs in all projections, 
the lower end projections might result in a higher 
indemnity fraction from droughts while the high 
end projections could create mixed conditions of 
excessive wet, excessive dry, and hybrid years. If 
it is assumed that the standard deviation of annual 
precipitation in 30-year periods is not greatly 
changed in the future (historically it has ranged from 
3.6 to 5.9 inches, but all but two 30-year periods fall 
within a range of 4.8 to 5.9 inches), the projection 
of a 5% to 15% increase in 30-year average 
precipitation suggests that excessive wetness/flood 
will become the dominant cause of indemnities, 
though adaptation mechanisms such as innovative 
drainage systems may help buffer this effect. In fact, 
a 15% increase of 30-year average precipitation 
is just over half the current standard deviation of 
annual precipitation. This implies a much increased 
frequency of having at least 30% indemnity from 
excessive wetness and flood, based upon the 
historical record (Figure 6.8). 

Workable Field Days 

Workable days in the field are a critical component of 
most field-crop operations. Producers require days in 
which field work can be conducted without causing 
problems that would negatively crop production. The 

Chapter 6 

Fig. 6.6. In Iowa during 19552010, fraction of total annual 
indemnity from drought, flood, and excessive wetness 
versus the annual rainfall. Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Risk Management Agency. Cause of Loss Historical 
Data Files. Accessed from http://www.rma.usda.gov/data/ 
cause.html on 3/19/12. 


Fig. 6.7. Annual (solid line with black squares) and 30-year average precipitation (yellow squares) for Iowa 18732011. The 
30-year average is computed based on the WMO definition of climate normal. Precipitation in 2011 is through October. 

Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Risk Management Agency. Cause of Loss Historical Data Files. Accessed from 
http://www.rma.usda.gov/data/cause.html on 3/19/12. 


recent trend toward wetter springs has resulted in 
fewer workable field days during the planting season. 
The 50th percentile for 1976-2010 was 22.4 days. 
Prior to 1995 (the mid-point of the data record), the 
50th percentile was exceeded 10 times; since 1995, it 
has been matched or exceeded 6 times. 

Between 1976 and 1994, the average number of 
workable field days between April 2 and May 13 
was 22.65 days. This declined to 19.12 days for 
the 1995-2010 period. The number of workable 
field days for April through mid-May is negatively 
correlated with April through May rainfall (-0.716) 
(Figure 6.9). The 1873-2010 Iowa statewide April- 
May rainfall has a mean of 7.9 inches, median of 
7.04 inches, 75th percentile of 8.8 inches, and 95th 
percentile of 10.3 inches. When April-May rainfall 
is below the median, field work days are rarely less 
than 20; whereas above the 75th percentile they 
are rarely more than 20. One adaptation to reduced 
workable field days is to increase equipment size to 
allow more area to be managed in a shorter period of 
time; another adaptation would be to diversify crops 
to spread the operation times over a larger portion of 
the growing season, and, finally, selection of varieties 
with different maturity lengths would allow for a 
longer period for planting. 

Estimates of workable field days should be calculated 
for all agricultural regions for the critical fall and 
spring field seasons to help producers understand the 
effects of a changing climate on their decisionmaking 
process. Excessive precipitation during the fall can 
disrupt harvest operations and negatively affect product 
quality. Examples of untimely events affecting 
product quality have been reported for raisin harvest, 
hay harvest, and grain harvest, where excessive soil 
water causes delays in harvest and soil damage from 
equipment passing over saturated fields. Excessive 
moisture during harvest can also lead to disease 
outbreaks, which affect hay, grain, vegetable, or fruit 
quality. 

Soil Erosion 

Soil erosion rates are useful for illustrating the 
potential effects of extreme events on agriculture. 
Soil erosion is the result of inadequate infiltration 
rates and excessive rainfall that exceeds the soils 
capacity to absorb water (see Chapter 4 of this 
report). Iowa State University (ISU) has conducted 
an extensive effort to provide estimates of statewide 
soil erosion using a soil-erosion model and the 
National Weather Services 15-minute radar 
estimates of rainfall. 

A spring 2010 aerial survey conducted by the 
Environmental Working Group (EWG) indicated that 
soil erosion and runoff (Cox et al. 2011) are likely 
far worse than the ISU predictions suggest, however. 
Part of this underestimate is the inability of current 
models to account for the effect of widespread 

Chapter 6 

Fig. 6.8. Projected mid-21st Century change (20402069 minus 19701999) of 30-year average annual temperature and 
precipitation. Source: Bias Corrected and Downscaled WCRP CMIP3 Climate Projections archive at http://gdo-dcp.ucllnl. 
org/downscaled_cmip3_projections/. Maurer, E. P., L. Brekke, T. Pruitt, and P. B. Duffy (2007), Fine-resolution climate projections 
enhance regional climate change impact studies, Eos Trans. AGU, 88(47), 504. 


ephemeral gullies. During heavy rains, these 
gullies reappear rapidly where farmers have tilled 
and planted over natural depressions in the land, 
forming pipelines that swiftly carry away the water 
the soil cannot absorb. 

The ISU data and EWGs survey reinforce longstanding 
doubts about the current system used to 
determine sustainable levels of erosion for working 
cropland; sustainable here is defined as how much 
soil loss the land can tolerate before it loses its ability 
to support a healthy crop. There is substantial and 
growing evidence that these tolerable soil losses (T 
values) greatly overstate the ability of cropland 
to remain fertile when experiencing soil erosion 
and water runoff. These concerns may become 
particularly relevant at a time when a warming 
climate is producing ever more frequent severe 
storms that can quickly exceed soils ability to absorb 
water and can produce high levels of erosion over 
very short periods of time. 

Over 3 days in 2007 (May 5-7), such a storm 
pummeled large portions of southwest Iowa. Data 
available from USDAs 2007 National Resources 
Inventory (USDA 2009) calculate the average 
erosion rates in Iowa at 5.2 tons per acre per year, 
only slightly higher than the sustainable T-value of 
5 tons per acre per year for most Iowa soils (Figure 
6.10). However, according to results from the Iowa 
daily erosion project (Iowa State University), average 
erosion exceeded sustainable rates in 198 townships 
(4.6 million acres). On May 6, the worst day of the 
storm, 182 townships encompassing 4.2 million acres 
suffered erosion exceeding the sustainable rate for an 
entire year. In 69 townships (1.6 million acres), soil 
eroded at twice the sustainable rate, an average of 10 
tons per acre. In 14 townships (323,000 acres), the 
rate was more than 20 tons per acre. 

Chapter 6 

Fig. 6.9. Iowa average field work days during April through mid May 
versus April through May rainfall. Light blue line is 50% April-May 
rainfall (7.04 inches); dark blue is 75% (8.8 inches); black is 95% 
(10.3 inches). Source: Monthly Iowa Precipitation Data is from Iowa 
State Climatologists Office (http://www.iowaagriculture.gov/climatology.
asp), who is responsible for quality control and quality assurance 
of the 33-station long-term climate reference network. After 
QC/QA, the data are submitted to the NOAA data archive at NCDC. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service. 
Field Work Days Data Files. Accessed from http://www.rma. 
usda.gov/data/cause.html on 3/19/12. 


Fig. 6.10. Estimates of soil displacement per unit of daily rainfall obtained from Iowa data. Data Source: The data collected 
for this summary plot are archived under the Iowa Daily Erosion Project. http://wepp.mesonet.agron.iastate.edu/ (Verified 
Apr 2, 2012). 


Observations of soil erosion and daily rainfall rates 
show a rapid increase in soil displacement as the 
daily rainfall exceeds 100 mm. These daily totals 
are not uncommon during extreme events for the 
upper Midwest. More intense rainfall events are 
likely to cause more erosion events unless improved 
conservation practices (e.g., residue cover, reduced 
tillage, installed waterway conduits) are adopted to 
reduce rain energy, protect soil, and reduce runoff. 

Conclusions 

There remains a high degree of uncertainty in 
estimating both the biophysical and the economic 
impacts of climate change. That uncertainty is due 
to limitations of data; inherent uncertainty in future 
projections of emissions, available technology, and 
socio-economic conditions within the agricultural 
sector, and more broadly; and due to limitations in 
the availability of estimation methods that capture 
system-wide interactions among sectors in climate 
effects and opportunities for adaptation. While 
several economic impact assessments have suggested 
that climate change may not substantially affect 
domestic producers and consumers in the short-term, 
such results are highly sensitive to the future climate 
scenarios selected for analysis and to boundaries 
placed on the scope of climate effects considered. 
Estimates of aggregate economic impacts of climate 
changes often mask considerable variability across 
demographics and regions, both within the U.S. and 
worldwide. Even in the short-term, climate change 
will likely increase the incidence of global hunger 
through effects on the worlds poorest and most 
at-risk populations. 

Chapter 6 


Climate change presents unprecedented challenges 
to the adaptive capacity of the U.S. 
agricultural sector. U. S. producers are adapting 
crop and livestock management practices in an 
effort to reduce new production risks associated 
with the increased weather variability accompanying 
climate change. Current climate change effects 
are challenging agricultural management and are 
likely to require major adjustments in production 
practices over the next 30 years. Projected changes 
over the next century have the potential to transform 
U.S. agriculture, particularly for production systems 
at their marginal climate ranges. Effective adaptive 
action across the multiple dimensions of the U.S. 
agricultural system offers the potential to capitalize 
on the opportunities presented by climate change and 
minimize the costs by reducing the severity or avoiding 
negative effects of a changing climate. 

Understanding Agricultural 
Vulnerability 

Vulnerability and adaptive capacity are characteristics 
of human and natural systems, are dynamic 
and multi-dimensional, and are influenced by 
complex interactions among social, economic, and 
environmental 
factors (Adger et al. 2007). The vulnerability 
of a system is a function of the exposure 
and the sensitivity of the system to hazardous conditions 
mediated by the ability of the system to cope, 
adapt, or recover from the effects of those conditions, 
i.e., the adaptive capacity or resilience of the system 
(Smit and Wandel 2006) (Figure 7.1). Because agricultural 
systems are human-dominated ecosystems, 
the vulnerability of agriculture to climatic change 
is strongly dependent not just on the biophysical 
effects of climate change but also on the responses 
taken by humans to moderate those effects (Marshall 
2010). Adaptive decisions are shaped by the operating 
context within which decisionmaking occurs 
(for example, existing natural resource quality and 
non-climate stressors, and government policy and 
programs), access to effective adaptation options, 
and the individual capability to take adaptive action. 

The concepts of vulnerability, adaptation, adaptive 
capacity, and resilience are well developed in the 
global change literature (synthesized in Smit and 
Wandel 2006; Adger et al. 2007; Nelson et al. 2007) 
(Table 7.1); however, the methodological development 
to apply these concepts to adaptation planning 
and assessment lags behind, particularly in developed 
countries (Moser et al. 2008; Kenny 2011). Efforts to 


Chapter 7 

Adapting to Climate Change 

Fig 7.1. Linked human and biophysical factors that determine the ultimate vulnerability of agricultural systems to climate 
change (Marshall et al. 2010). 


identify key factors that contribute to system vulnerability 
to climate change effects, that address issues 
of uncertainty, scale, and multidimensional system 
interactions, and that develop effective integrated 
indices of vulnerability or adaptive capacity typify 
methodological research (e.g., Adger and Vincent 
2005; Brooks et al. 2005; Alberini et al. 2006; 
Eakin and Bojrquez-Tapia 2008) and participatory 
research methods are increasingly employed (e.g., 
Petheram et al. 2010; Krishnamurthy et al. 2011). 
Agricultural researchers have contributed to this 
literature, though the primary focus of this work has 
been on small-holder agriculture in the developing 
world (e.g., Vincent 2007; Simes et al. 2010; Below 
et al. 2012). 

Adaptation Drivers 

Agricultural productivity is determined by a 
diverse set of biophysical, social, economic, and 
technological drivers operating across multiple 
dimensions of time and space. These drivers 
create opportunity and present risk to agricultural 
production. In particular, agriculture is highly 
sensitive to weather effects with climate variations, 
soil type, biotic stressors, and management being the 
factors linked to production variability across many 
regions (Howden et al. 2007; Hatfield et al. 2011; 
Lal 2011). As climate change intensifies, Howden et 
al. (2007) suggests that climate risk is likely to be 
added to the production, finance, and marketing risks 
already commonly managed by producers (Harwood 

Chapter 7 

Table 7.1. Definitions of adaptation concepts. 

Concept Definition 
Adaptation Adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic 
stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities. 
Various types of adaptation can be distinguished, including anticipatory and reactive adaptation, 
private and public adaptation, and autonomous and planned adaptation (Parry 
et al 2007, p 869). 
Adaptive capacity The ability of a system to adjust to climate change including climate variability and extremes) 
to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope 
with the consequences (Parry et al 2007, p 869). 
Coping capacity The ability of a system to deal with the impacts of present-day weather extremes or 
climate variability (Luers and Moser 2006). 
Exposure The nature and degree to which a system is exposed to significant climatic variations 
(Parry et al 2007, p 987). 
Maladaptation Any changes in natural or human systems that inadvertently increase vulnerability to climatic 
stimuli; an adaptation that does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but increases 
it instead (McCarthy et al 2001, pg 990). 
Mitigation An anthropogenic intervention to reduce the sources or enhance the sinks of greenhouse 
gases. (Parry et al 2007, p 878) 
Vulnerability The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of 
climate change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of 
the character, magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its 
sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity (Parry et al 2007, p 883). 
Resilience Resilience is the capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing 
change so as to still retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, and 
feedbacks. (Walker et al 2004). 
Sensitivity Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by 
climate-related stimuli. The effect may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response 
to a change in the mean, range, or variability of temperature) or indirect (e.g., damages 
caused by an increase in the frequency of coastal flooding due to sea level rise) (Parry et 
al 2007, p 881). 
Social-Ecological 
systems 
A set of critical resources (natural, socioeconomic, and cultural) whose flow and use 
is regulated by a combination of ecological and social systems (Holling and Gunderson 
2002). 
Vulnerability The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of 
climate change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of 
the character, magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its 
sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity (Parry et al 2007, p 883). 
et al. 1999). Climate risk will add complexity 
and increase uncertainty in agricultural decision 
environments throughout the multiple dimensions of 
the U.S. agricultural system. 

Key drivers that shape adaptive responses to climate 
change at the agricultural enterprise scale include: 
experience of indirect and direct effects of climate 
change (Field et al. 2007; Spence et al. 2011; 
Knutson et al. 2011), market signals (Antle 2009), 
current and proposed climate change policies (Batie 
2009), institutional strategies (Preston et al. 2011), 
farmer perceptions and preferences (Blackstock et al. 
2010; Nelson et al. 2010a; Arbuckle 2011; Weber and 
Stern 2011), issues awareness (e.g., food security) 
(Godfray et al. 2010), and information sources and 
types and how they are interpreted (Malka et al. 
2009; Blackstock et al. 2010; Tarnoczi and Berkes 
2010). University and industry research priorities 
that focus on science agendas and technologies are 
also drivers of adaptation investments because they 
influence the options available to those considering 
or undertaking adaptation (McDaniels et al. 1997; 
Cabrera et al. 2008). Taken together, these drivers 
inform both short- and long-term cost/benefit 
considerations by producers seeking to maintain 
profitability in the face of climate variability and 
change (Antle and Capalbo 2010). 

A Typology of Adaptation 

Adaptation strategies can be categorized according 
to a variety of central attributes: by temporal or 
spatial scope; by intentionality (e.g., spontaneous 
versus deliberate strategies); by specific aim (e.g., 

Chapter 7 

Table 7.2. A Typology of Climate Change Adaptation Strategies for Agriculture. This table presents examples of climate change 
adaptation strategies to key biophysical and social drivers of adaptation (Iglesias, et al. 2007, Smit and Skinner, 2002). The adaptation 
strategies are grouped according to the actors involved and the form the adaptation takes. The first three categories mainly involve 
enterprise-scale decision-making by producers. The last two are typically the responsibility of public agencies and agribusiness. Adaptations 
included in these categories could be thought of as system-wide. 

 Adaptation Strategies 
Key Adaptation Drivers Farm Production Practices Farm Financial Management Farm Infrastructure Technological Developments Government Programs and Insurance 
Increased variability 
in growing conditions 
(changes in seasonal 
temperature and precipitation 
patterns) 
Change crop variety and 
breed, change timing 
of farm operations, use 
season extension and irrigation, 
Build soil health 
Purchase crop insurance, 
invest in crop shares/future, 
participate in income stabilization 
programs, diversify 
household income 
Install water management 
(eg, catchment, swales), 
irrigation systems, weather 
protection systems, data 
collection/analysis systems 
Drought/cold/heat tolerant crop 
varieties, Efficient irrigation, 
Weather and climate information 
systems and decision-support 
tools, Farm-level resource mgt 
practices to improve resilience 
Modify gov. insurance, subsidy, support 
and incentive programs to influence 
farm-level risk management strategies, 
provide technical support for risk 
mgt. Modify land and water resource 
management policies and programs to 
improve resilience to climate change 
Increased soil degradation 
(increased erosion 
reduces soil quality) 
Soil conservation practices 
(eg, no-till, mulch), Build 
soil health 
Participate in soil conservation 
cost share and easement 
programs 
Install soil conservation 
structures (eg, terraces, 
grassed waterways, riparian 
areas) 
Farm-level soil conservation practices, 
Soil building amendments 
(eg. biochar, stabilizing agents) 
Modify land and water resource 
management policies and programs 
to promote soil conservation and soil 
health mgt. 
Increased pest pressure, 
novel pests 
IPM practices, Resistant 
crop varieties and breeds, 
Farmscaping 
Participate in insurance 
programs 
Purchase improved application 
technologies, Pest 
protection structures 
Pest resistant crop varieties, 
IPM options and early warning 
information systems, Decisionsupport 
tools, Pest suppression 
technologies 
Insurance programs, Risk analysis, IPM 
and weather-based decision-making, 
Technical advice 
Increased number, 
length and/or intensity 
of drought events 
Resistant varieties/breeds, 
adjust crop/livestock development, 
build soil health 
Participate in insurance 
programs 
Install water management 
systems (eg, catchment, 
swales), Install rrigation 
systems 
Drought resistant crop varieties 
and breeds, Alternative crops/ 
livestock, Efficient irrigation, 
Farm-level water management 
decision-support tools 
Insurance programs, Weather-based 
decision-making, Farm-level and regional 
contingency planning and water 
use priority planning, Technical advice 
Increased number and/ 
or intensity of flood 
events 
Avoid high risk locations/ 
time periods 
Participate in insurance 
programs 
Increase drainage capacity, 
Build defense structures, 
Restore/create wetlands, 
Floodplain mgt. plan 
Flood tolerant varieties, Excess 
water management technologies 
Insurance programs, Weather-based decision-
making, Farm-level and regional 
contingency planning, Technical advice 
Shift in optimum zones 
for current production 
systems 
Change in crop/livestock 
systems 
Participate in insurance 
programs 
Adapt existing infrastructure 
to new crop/livestock 
systems 
New climate control technologies, 
Adapt existing equipment to 
new crop/livestock systems 
Create transition insurance and costshare 
programs, Develop technical 
advice for transitioning to alternative 
resilient farming systems 
Government climate 
change policy 
Use GHG emissions reduction 
practices 
Participate in financial incentives 
programs 
Install GHG reduction 
measures 
GHG Monitoring/reduction and 
decision-tools 
Agricultural GHG management policies 
and programs 
Economic (eg. carbon 
markets) 
Adjust crop/livestock mix 
appropriate to new market 
Participate in new market Alter tillage and water 
management regimes and 
storage and use of livestock 
waste, invest in necessary 
equipment, re-train staff. 
Develop capabilities to manage 
GHG emissions. 
Develop and provide advice and 
guidance on BMP 
Consumer behavior 
(eg, diet change) 
Adjust crop/livestock mix to 
meet demand 
Participate in new market Develop flexibility to 
respond to changes in 
consumer behavior. 
Utilisation of web resources 
to stay informed and make 
informed decisions. 
Provision of information and advice on 
trends, preferences and market conditions. 
Perception of climate 
risk 
Short-term vs. long-term 
adjustments 
Participate in insurance 
programs 
Develop flexibility to enable 
rapid responses. 
Utilisation of most appropriate 
sources of information for decision 
making. 
Seasonal and decadal forecasts with 
associated probabilities of error. 
to modify effect versus reduce vulnerability); 
by sector (agriculture, tourism, public health); 
by specific process or outcome (e.g., to increase 
drought resistance versus maintain profit); by 
actor (individuals, local community, private sector, 
or government); by type of action (physical, 
technological, behavioral, regulatory or market); or 
by some combination of these and other attributes 
(Smit et al. 1999; Smit et al. 2000; Adger et al. 
2007). Based on a comprehensive analysis of 
Canadian agriculture, Smit and Skinner (2002) 
recommend organizing adaptation options by actor 
(producers, agro-industry, and government) and the 
type of action (farm management, infrastructure, 
technology, and government programs). 

Organizing agricultural adaptation options by actor 
and type of action facilitates adaptation planning 
and assessment because it identifies stakeholder 
agency and clarifies potential cross-scale interactions 
that may influence adaptive capacity. For example, 
adaptations to increased variability in growing 
conditions (the adaptation driver) can be made 
by producers (change crop cultivar), agribusiness 
(develop new crop cultivars), and government 
(provide climate risk insurance, cost-share 
installation of conservation practices that increase 
resilience to climatic variability). This typology also 
facilitates identification of the range of potential 
adaptive actions available to any particular actor 
and adaptive actions that address multiple drivers, 
such as managing for high quality soils. Table 7.3 
presents general examples of adaptation options for 
key adaptation drivers acting on the U.S. agricultural 
system organized, according to Smit and Skinners 
(2002) typology. This table can be viewed as a menu 
of potential adaptation responses to specific drivers 
by producers, agribusiness, and government actors 
operating in the U.S. agricultural system. 

Recently, a new typology has emerged to classify 
adaptation options consistent with the systems 
perspective (e.g., Nelson et al. 2007; Millar et al. 
2007; Easterling 2009; van Apeldoorn et al. 2011; 
Pelling 2011). This typology classifies adaptation 
options along a spectrum of intention and action 
resistance, resilience and transformation  that 
describe successively greater change in the adaptive 
capacity of the agricultural system. 

Millar et al. (2007) explain the differences in 
management intention along the resistanceresilience-
transformation spectrum in the 
management of forests under climate change. 
Resistance strategies seek to maintain the status quo 
over the near term through management actions that 

Chapter 7 

Table 7.3. The components of agricultural adaptation (Bryant et al 2000). 

Component Elements or Examples 
Characteristic Stresses Climatic change and variability 
Government policies 
Consumer pressure 
Economic conditions 
Non-climatic Environmental Factors 
Multiple Dimensions of the Agricultural System Cultural 
Economic 
Institutional 
Political 
Social 
Technological 
Scales of System Vulnerabilities and Responses International 
National 
Agricultural Sector 
Region 
Community, Locality 
Farm, Field, Plant 
Responses Producer: crop choice, diversification, irrigation, crop insurance 
Public and Institutional: information, research and development, 
infrastructure, taxes and subsidies 
resist climate change disturbance. These strategies 
are typically reactive, site-specific interventions 
that do not enhance the adaptive capacity of the 
ecosystem, but operate to defend the existing 
ecosystem from climate change effects through 
more intensive management intervention. Resistance 
strategies can be costly, will likely increase in cost 
and difficulty over time, and may ultimately fail as 
climate change effects intensify. Resilience strategies 
are typically proactive actions that increase the 
adaptive capacity of the ecosystem by improving its 
ability to self-organize so as to moderate effects of 
climate-related disturbances and return to a healthy 
condition after a disturbance, either naturally or with 
minimal management intervention. Transformation 
strategies increase adaptive capacity by facilitating 
transition of the existing ecosystem to a new 
ecosystem with a different structure and function 
that are better suited to sustained production under 
rapidly changing climate conditions. 

The resistance-resilience-transformation framework 
that is applied to climate risk management in U.S. 
national forests (USDA Forest Service 2010; Spies 
et al. 2010) defines adaption options in the National 
Fish, Wildlife, and Plants Climate Adaptation 
Strategy (NFWP Climate Adaptation Strategy 2012) 
and is recommended for use in an ecosystem-based 
approach to agricultural adaptation (Easterling 2009). 
Research and development efforts to better understand 
and manage agricultural ecosystem resilience 
and stability in the face of climate change are explicit 
in the strategic goals of climate change adaptation 
programs administered by the USDA Global Change 
Program, the Agricultural Research Service, and 
the Natural Resources Conservation Service (GAO 
2009). 

Resistance strategies in use today by U.S. farmers 
coping with current changes in weather variability 
may include changes in management practices such 
as adjustments in cultivar selection and the timing 
of field operations, increased use of pesticides to 
control higher pest pressures, and the purchase of 
crop insurance. Adjustments in management practices 
include the use of multiple cultivars within 
monocultures (Newton et al. 2011) and diversifying 
crop rotations (Lin 2011) to manage pest populations, 
integrating livestock with crop production systems 
to manage resource cycles (Tomich et al. 2011), 
building soil quality to manage water cycles, and 
other practices typically associated with sustainable 
agriculture. Such actions may increase the capacity 
of the agricultural system to self-organize in response 
to climate change effects and avoid loss of productivity 
with minimal reactive management intervention 
(Wall and Smit 2005; Easterling 2009; Lin 2011; 
Tomich et al. 2011). Transformation adaptations are 
those that might include the northward migration of 
existing production systems and the shift of cultivated 
row crops into forest, perennial grasslands, or 
wetlands. Based on projected climate change effects, 
over the next century it is likely that agricultural 
systems in some areas of the United States will have 
to undergo a transformation to remain productive and 
profitable (Easterling, 2009). 

Enhancing the Adaptive Capacity of 
Agriculture 

The U.S. agricultural system has demonstrated 
a remarkable adaptive capacity over the last 150 
years as crop and livestock production systems 
spread across the diverse American landscape and 
successfully responded to variations in climate 
and other natural resources, as well as to dynamic 
changes in agricultural knowledge, technology, 
markets, and, most recently, public demands 
for the sustainable production of agricultural 
products (Reilly and Blanc 2009; NRC 2010). This 
adaptive capacity has been driven in large part by 
public sector investment in agricultural research, 
development, and extension activities (Antle 2009) 
made during a period of climatic stability and 
abundant technical, financial, and natural resource 
availability. 

Chapter 7 

Agricultural Sustainability 

Sustainability has been described as the ability 
to meet core societal needs in a way that can 
be maintained indefinitely without significant 
negative effects. Authors of the National 
Academies of Science (NAS 2010) study on 
sustainable agricultural systems in the 21st 
century identified four generally agreed-upon 
goals that help define sustainable agriculture: 

 Satisfy human food, feed, and fiber needs, 
and contribute to biofuel needs. 

 Enhance environmental quality and the 
resource base. 

 Sustain the economic viability of agriculture. 

 Enhance the quality of life for farmers, farm 
workers, and society as a whole. 


Government policy and programs will be crucial to 
effective adaptation efforts as the agricultural system 
responds to projected increases in temperature and 
precipitation variability and extremes accompanying 
climate change that likely will be outside the range of 
individual, community, and institutional experience 
(Adger et al. 2007, Antle and Capalbo 2010). 
Government efforts to enhance the adaptive capacity 
of the agricultural system will be complicated by 
the dynamic nature and complexity of interactions 
between the climate system, the agricultural system 
(Adger et al. 2007), and a scarcity of crucial 
agricultural resources such as land, water, energy, 
and ecosystem services (NRC 2010). The potential 
for effective adaptive action is dynamic, involves 
social, economic, and ecological processes, and is 
driven by decisionmaking at multiple scales and by 
multiple actors (Adger et al. 2007; Marshall et al. 
2010). 

Howden et al. (2007) and others (e.g., Smit et al. 
1999; Moser et al. 2008; Wolfe et al. 2008) discuss 
some of the long-term opportunities that an improved 
understanding of adaptation presents to society. 
Adaptation has the potential to reduce the risks of 
climate change by improving planning, preventing 
maladaptation, and informing investment and 
management of resources such as perennial crops, 
major infrastructure projects, and capacity building 
programs. This section discusses some key influences 
that shape the operating context for adaptive 
responses by the U.S. agricultural system: climate 
policy, economic perspectives, finding the balance 
between mitigation and adaptation, and the limits 
to adaptation. Choosing among options for adaptive 
action and the influence of individual decision 
making on adaptation responses within this context 
are presented in the next section. 

Climate Policy 

Climate policy is a dynamic area of public policymaking 
under active investigation by the global 
change research community. Initial climate policy 
development and analysis focused on managing the 
mitigation of climate change through production and 
use of energy (Klein et al. 2007), but as awareness 
of the need to adapt to climate change has grown in 
this century, governments world-wide have initiated 
adaptation planning, even though many questions 
remain about effective adaptation strategies (Adger 
et al. 2007). Several crucial differences between 
mitigation and adaptation processes influence 
the nature of policy development efforts (Klein 
et al. 2007). Climate change mitigation involves 
international cooperation to manage greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions on a global scale (typically 
national and international) and uses quantifiable 
metrics that facilitate the assessment of mitigation 
measures. In contrast, adaptive actions tend to be 
taken at local to national levels, are difficult to 
quantify and are context sensitive, which introduces 
considerable complexity into the assessment of 
adaptive measures (Klein et al. 2007). 

The local nature of adaptation complicates the 
implementation of government support for adaptation 
efforts because of the potential for complex 
cross-scale interactions between top-down policy 
decisions made at national or international scales, 
and bottom-up adaptive responses, for example, 
see sidebar) Belliveau et al. 2006; Klein et al. 
2007; Urwin and Jordan 2008). As experience with 
government adaptation planning for climate change 
grows, the potential for synergies and tradeoffs 
created by interactions between adaptation and 
mitigation policies (Klein et al. 2007) and nonclimate 
policies (Belliveau et al. 2006; Urwin and 
Jordan 2008) add additional complexities to those 
imposed by other social, economic, and ecological 
conditions (Adger et al. 2007). Researchers and 
policy analysts have given little attention to 
addressing the critical challenges to adaptation 
governance, such as building support for action, 
identifying effective policy strategies, or addressing 
institutional barriers to adaptive action (Moser et al. 
2008; Smith et al. 2009). 

In an analysis of climate change adaptation 
policymaking by U.S. municipalities, States, and the 
Federal Government, Smith et al. (2009) identified 
an adaptation architecture fundamental to 
facilitating successful governance of adaptive action. 
Components of the architecture include governance 
processes that provide clear leadership, enable 
coordination between agencies and departments, 
incorporate mainstream climate considerations into 
daily decision making, integrate new funding for 
adaptation into baseline support for climate-sensitive 
sectors, address institutional and policy barriers 
to adaptation efforts, and involve stakeholders in 
policy development and implementation. In addition, 
government decisionmakers employ decision tools 
that are robust under uncertainty and informed 
by accurate, timely, and scale-appropriate climate 
change information. Finally, government programs 
invest in adaptation research to understand conditions 
that promote or impede adaptation decisions and in 
technology development and diffusion to expand 
adaptation options. Smith et al. (2009) suggest that 
in order for adaptation planning to be fully effective 
at the local level, these components of the adaptation 
architecture must be integrated within an adaptive 
management framework. 

Chapter 7 


National Climate Change Adaptation Strategies 

Over the last decade, national climate change 
adaptation policies and programs have been adopted 
or are under development in Australia, Canada, the 
European Union, and the United States (Biesbroek et 
al. 2010). Agriculture is commonly recognized as a 
key climate-sensitive sector in these national plans, 
along with related sectors such as water resources, 
energy, finance and insurance, and natural resources. 
Adaptation measures are typically planned as an 
element within broader sectoral initiatives, such as 
water-resource or disaster-risk planning (Adger et al. 
2007). 

National adaptation planning got underway in 
the United States in 2009, when the Interagency 
Climate Change Adaptation Task Force (Task Force) 
was established to provide Federal support and 
coordination for adaptation planning at Federal, 
State, local, and tribal levels of government (ICC 
Adaptation Task Force 2011). Senior representatives 
from more than 20 departments and agencies 
participate in the work of the Task Force, which 
is co-chaired by representatives of the Council 
on Environmental Quality, the Office of Science 
and Technology Policy, and the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration. All Task Force 
work is being conducted in accordance with a set 
of goals and guiding principles that foster locally 
focused, participatory, ecosystem-based approaches 
to planning, integrated assessment and effective 
decisionmaking, and international collaboration (see 
sidebar, page 126). Initial work has involved agency 
assessment of climate change effects on operations 
and services, the preparation of climate adaptation 
plans for each participating agency, and development 
of cross-cutting adaptation plans for fresh and ocean 
waters, and fish, wildlife, and plant resources. 

Agricultural Adaptation Policy 

Agricultural climate policy is an active area of 
research, development, and analysis in the global 
change community because of the climate-sensitive 
nature of agricultural production, the critical 
importance of agricultural production to human 
well-being, the dependence of agriculture on natural 
resources and ecosystem services, and the unique 
relationship between agriculture and climate, relative 
to other sectors of the economy. In developed 
economies, agricultural policy has focused on climate 
change mitigation, with agriculture being viewed as 
both a significant source of GHG emissions and a 
significant sink for sequestration of carbon (Adger 
et al. 2007; Klein et al. 2007). In contrast, according 
to Yohe et al. (2002), agricultural climate policy for 
developing economies features adaptation because 
food security and sustainable rural livelihoods are 
primary aims. Much of this work has taken place 
within a sustainable development framework, and 
there is considerable research and policy literature 
addressing the issues of agricultural adaptation to 
climate change particularly for small-holder farmers, 
the rural poor, and other resource-dependent social 
groups in developing countries. 

Chapter 7 

The Local Nature of Adaptation Complicates National Adaptation Efforts 

Cross-scale interactions between top-down, non-climate policies and bottom-up adaptive responses by 
producers can increase agricultural vulnerability to climate change. 

Adaptive actions taken by wine producers in British Columbia, Canada demonstrate the perverse 
outcomes that sometimes occur through interactions between top down policy and bottom-up 
place-based adaptations. In response to increased competition from foreign wine imports following 
the North American Free Trade Agreement, grape producers responded to increased competition from 
high quality foreign wine imports by replacing existing low-quality, but winter-hardy, grape varieties with 
more cold-sensitive but higher quality varieties in an adaptation that was facilitated by government aid. 
This change enhanced the wine industrys domestic and international competitiveness, thereby reducing 
market risks, but simultaneously increased its susceptibility to winter injury. Producers must irrigate to 
prevent frost damage in winter, an adaptation that decreases market competitiveness because it reduces 
the quality of the grapes. Winter irrigation also increases production costs, disease risks and producers 
vulnerability to water shortages (Belliveau et al. 2006). 


National agricultural adaptation planning has 
only recently begun, so documentation of the 
process is sparse and most of the relevant literature 
presents policy goals and updates of progress on 
initial implementation efforts; however, general 
recommendations for agricultural adaptation policy 
measures are sometimes offered by researchers or 
analysts exploring climate change effects at the 
national scale. The comprehensive assessment of 
existing or proposed agricultural policies addressing 
issues such as climate change mitigation, subsidy 
and trade, insurance and disaster assistance, soil 
and water conservation, environmental quality, 
and the production of biofuels to identify potential 
synergies and tradeoffs with proposed adaptation 
policies is often recommended (e.g., Antle and 
Capbalo 2010; Olesen et al. 2011). Because of 
the uncertainties associated with climate change 
effects and the complexity of adaptation processes, 
adaptive governance strategies are recommended 
to implement, evaluate, and revise adaptation 
strategies (e.g., Olesen and Bindi 2002; Howden 
et al. 2003; Biesbroek et al. 2010). Enhancing the 
resilience of agriculture to climate change through 
adaptation strategies that promote development of 
sustainable agriculture is a common no-regrets 
recommendation (e.g., Howden et al. 2003; Howden 
et al. 2007; Olesen et al. 2011). Broad policy 
measures that may enhance the adaptive capacity of 
agriculture include strengthening climate-sensitive 
assets, promoting adaptive governance approaches 
that encourage climate-learning and adaptive 
management, integrating adaptation into all relevant 
government policies, and addressing non-climate 
stressors that degrade adaptive capacity (Marshall et 
al. 2010). 

Mitigation and Adaptation: Complement or 
Tradeoff? 

According to Klein et al. (2007), only recently have 
policymakers begun to understand that effective 
climate policy will involve a balanced portfolio 
of mitigation and adaptation actions that rely on 
interactions between the two as a means to enhance 
adaptation. Recognizing the need for both and the 
need to explore tradeoffs and synergies between 
the two, policymakers are faced with an array 

Chapter 7 

U.S. National Adaptation Strategy (ICC Adaptation Task Force 2011) 

Integrating Adaptation into Federal Government Planning and Activities: Agencies are taking 
steps to manage climate impacts to Federal agency missions, programs, and operations to ensure that 
resources are invested wisely and Federal services remain effective for the American people. Agencies 
are developing climate adaptation plans to identify their vulnerabilities and prioritize activities that 
reduce climate risk. 

Building Resilience to Climate Change in Communities: Recognizing that most adaptation occurs 
at the local level, Federal agencies are working with diverse stakeholders in communities to prepare for 
a range of extreme weather and climate impacts (e.g., flooding, drought, and wildfire) that put people, 
property, local economies, and ecosystems at risk. 

Improving Accessibility and Coordination of Science for Decision Making: To advance understanding 
and management of climate risks, the federal government is working to develop strong partnerships, 
enhance regional coordination of climate science and services, and provide accessible information and 
tools to help decision makers develop strategies to reduce extreme weather impacts and climate risks. 

Developing Strategies to Safeguard Natural Resources in a Changing Climate: Recognizing that 
American communities depend on natural resources and the valuable ecosystem services they provide, 
agencies are working with key partners to create a coordinated set of national strategies to help safeguard 
the Nations valuable freshwater, ocean, fish, wildlife, and plant resources in a changing climate. 

Enhancing Efforts to Lead and Support International Adaptation: To promote economic 
development, regional stability, and U.S. security interests around the world, the Federal Government 
is supporting a range of bilateral and multilateral climate change adaptation activities and coordinating 
defense, development and diplomacy policies to take into account growing climate risks. 


of complex questions that cannot be answered 
with any certainty (Klein et al. 2005). Studies of 
the agricultural sector show the importance of 
identifying potential synergies between adaptation 
and mitigation strategies, and the synergies possible 
with the use of coherent climate policy frameworks 
that link issues such as carbon sequestration, 
GHG emissions, land-use change, regional water 
management, and the long-term sustainability of 
production systems (Easterling et al. 2007; Jones et 
al. 2007 Rosenzweig and Tubiello 2007). 

Mitigation and adaptation have some similarities and 
several crucial differences that interact to complicate 
adaptation efforts (Klein et al. 2007). Both mitigation 
and adaptation responses involve technological, 
institutional, and behavioral options, and are driven 
by a similar set of factors that determine the capacity 
to act. Both are implemented on a local or regional 
scale, and may be motivated by local and regional 
interests, as well as global concerns. Differences 
between mitigation and adaptation actions arise as a 
result of differences in scale and intention of effect. 
Mitigation actions engage the global climate system, 
involve long lag times between action and response, 
produce global benefits through local investment, and 
aim to reduce all potential climate effects by slowing 
global warming. In contrast, adaptation actions 
typically engage the local agricultural system, yield 
immediate benefits by reducing climate vulnerability, 
produce local benefits through local investments, and 
can selectively manage agricultural system response 
to climate to reduce or avoid negative effects and 
take advantage of positive effects. Mitigation and 
adaptation can be complementary, because each 
addresses a different aspect of climate risk (Jones et 
al. 2007); however, interactions between mitigation 
and adaptation responses, both within and across 
scales, complicate the management of both (Klein et 
al. 2007). For example, intensive livestock producers 
may respond to increased average temperatures 
by making adaptations that enhance the cooling 
and ventilation of animal housing, or they may 
respond by reducing stocking densities. The former 
adaptation would likely increase energy use and 
interfere with mitigation efforts, while the latter 
would contribute to mitigation efforts through the 
reduction of GHG emissions (Rosenzweig and 
Tubiello 2007). 

As a result of these differences, mitigation action 
is often driven by international initiatives managed 
by national governments, while adaptive action is 
usually initiated by the individuals, communities 
and regions experiencing the damaging effects of 
climate variability and change (Klein et al. 2007). 
In addition, the research exploring mitigation and 
adaptation involve different communities of scholars 
with very different analytical approaches; mitigation 
research and policy focuses on technological and 
economic issues, utilizes quantitative metrics and 
relies on top-down aggregate modeling for studying 
mitigation tradeoffs, while adaptation research 
focuses on qualitative, place-based, systems analysis 
(Klein et al. 2005; Wilbanks et al. 2007). These 
differences create barriers to the integrated analysis 
of mitigation and adaptation synergies and tradeoffs 
even though adaptation is now recognized as a 
necessary complement to mitigation efforts (Klein et 
al. 2007). 

Integrated Assessment of Mitigation and Adaptation 
Responses 

The relationships between mitigation and adaptation 
are being explored through conceptual and policy 
analysis using approaches ranging from complex 
quantitative simulation modeling to participatory 
case studies designed to elucidate interactions and 
their implications for specific locales or sectors 
within the context of broader development objectives 
(Klein et al. 2007). Integrated assessment models 
(IAMs) offer a quantitative approach to the integrated 
analysis of the societal costs and benefits of climate 
change and climate policy; however, in current 
IAMs, climate policy is dominated by mitigation 
(Klein et al. 2007) and the models have other 
limitations that call into question their usefulness as 
an analytical tool in adaptation planning and policy 
analysis (see Chapter 6). For example, IAMs are 
likely to underestimate the negative effects of climate 
change on crop production because the models use 
average weather data and do not simulate pests and 
disease effects (Antle and Capalbo 2010). 

As discussed in greater detail below, recent efforts 
to develop methods to support the comprehensive 
assessment of mitigation and adaptation options 
recommend seeking out win-win and no-regrets 
solutions within a robust decision framework, rather 
than using optimization approaches, because of 
the uncertainties involved in the analysis (Klein 
et al. 2005; Jones et al. 2007; Wilbanks et al. 
2007). Sustainable development has emerged as a 
potentially powerful integrator of mitigation and 
adaptation options that support the development of 
resilient communities and sectors in the developed 
and the developing world (Yohe et al. 2002). 
Sustainable development, mitigation and adaptation 
share many determinants (Yohe et al. 2007; Goklany 
2007), and the interactions between the global 
climate system and socioeconomic development 
patterns are increasingly recognized (Klein et al. 
2005). 

Chapter 7 

Sustainable development 
has emerged as a 
potentially powerful 
integrator of mitigation 
and adaptation options 
that support the 
development of resilient 
communities and sectors 
in the developed and the 
developing world. 


Adaptation Costs and Benefits 

The complexity of adaptation processes and the 
uncertainty in projections of climate change effects 
challenge efforts to estimate the costs of adaptation 
and the benefits gained from taking adaptive action. 
The literature addressing the costs and benefits 
of adaptation to climate change is sparse and 
fragmented in scope (Adger et al. 2007). Because 
of uncertainties about the potential damages that 
would be avoided by adaptation and the scarcity of 
information on adaptation processes and associated 
costs, the methodologies used to estimate adaptation 
costs are widely acknowledged to be speculative at 
best (Adger et al. 2007) and likely underestimate 
the costs of adaptation (Parry et al. 2009). This 
is because of the bias toward hard adaptations 
(e.g., publically financed structural measures like 
expansion of water supply) over soft adaptations 
(e.g., change in behavior to more efficient use of 
existing water supplies) that exist in national and 
international assessments. 

The economic response of the agricultural sector 
to climate change effects has received relatively 
extensive attention by researchers considering the 
benefits of farm-level adaptations and adjustments 
made through markets and international trade (Adger 
et al. 2007). This work suggests that, at larger scales, 
the benefits of adaptation will be sufficient to offset 
the costs of climate change effects in temperate 
regions, but there are likely to be large variations 
across and within regions, including the United 
States (Adger et al. 2007; Chapter 6). 

The recognition of the inherent uncertainties 
associated with adaptation cost-benefit analysis 
coupled with the desire to move ahead with 
adaptation planning despite these uncertainties 
have driven research to develop robust adaptationdecision 
strategies (e.g., Wilbanks et al. 2007; Parry 
et al. 2009; World Bank 2010; Moser and Ekstrom 
2010; Jones and Preston 2011). Such strategies 
support robust adaptation planning through use 
of adaptive management practices, case studies, 
hedging mechanisms, methods that prioritize and 
sequence adaptation investments, and methods that 
support a consideration of the social, institutional, 
and cultural factors that influence adaptation efforts 
(e.g., Council of Australia Governments 2007; Parry 
et al. 2009; World Bank 2010; Brown et al. 2011). 
Australia (Hills and Bennett 2010) and Canada (BC 
Agriculture 2012) currently use robust adaptation 
planning frameworks in regional agricultural 
adaptation planning. 

Of particular utility in agricultural adaptation 
planning may be selection of no-regrets adaptations, 
which are cost effective under current climate 
conditions and also likely to address risks 
associated with projected climate change effects 
(UK Climate Impacts Programme 2011). Although 
poorly documented, there may be opportunities 
for no-regrets adaptation options in agriculture 
(Howden et al. 2007; Jackson et al. 2010; Tomich 
et al. 2011), e.g., through use of water quality and 
soil conservation best management practices, and 
sustainable agriculture practices that enhance the 
resilience of the agricultural system. 

Limits to Adaptation 

High adaptive capacity does not guarantee successful 
adaptation to climate change. Adaptation assessment 
and planning efforts routinely encounter conditions 
that serve to limit adaptive action regardless of the 
adaptive capacity of the system under study (Adger 
et al. 2007; Moser and Ekstrom 2010). Limits to 
adaptation are conditions or factors that render 
adaptation ineffective as a response to climate 
change and are largely insurmountable (Adger et 
al. 2007, pg. 733), while barriers to adaptation are 
obstacles that can be overcome with concerted 
effort (Moser and Ekstrom 2010, pg. 2). These 
terms are sometimes used interchangeably because 
the perception of an obstacle as a barrier or a limit 
to adaptation depends on social perspectives such as 
cultural norms or level of technological development 
(Adger et al. 2009). 

The limits and barriers to adaptation  some 
ecological, and others arising from economic or 
social considerations that complicate adaptation 
efforts  add uncertainty to the adaptation process 
and raise ethical questions about adaptation as a 
response to climate change. As a result of these 
limits, the capacity for adaptation and the processes 
by which it occurs vary greatly within and across 
economic sectors, communities, regions, and 
countries. Successful adaptation planning processes 
will include an assessment of the limits to adaptation 
in the design and implementation of policy and 
programs. 

Ecological Limits to Adaptation 

Increasing evidence exists that the resilience of 
agricultural systems to global change is dependent 
on a wide range of ecosystem processes that provide 
services to agriculture, such as the regulation 
of water quality and quantity, waste processing, 

Chapter 7 


climate protection, and the suppression of pest 
populations (Peterson 2009; Jackson et al. 2010; 
Tomich et al. 2011). The ability of ecosystems to 
provide these services to agriculture is increasingly 
compromised by multiple stressors such as pollution, 
agricultural intensification, overgrazing, ecological 
simplification, and the effects of climate variability 
and change (Folke et al. 2004; Falkenmark et al. 
2007; Peterson 2009; Jackson et al. 2010). In some 
cases, the combined effects of these stressors have 
pushed ecosystems past critical ecological thresholds 
(tipping points), resulting in a sudden shift from 
a productive to an unproductive state (Folke et al. 
2005; Adger et al. 2007; Peterson 2009). Ecosystem 
shifts represent a significant challenge to resource 
management that is often outside human experience 
(Folke et al. 2004). Climate change effects that 
surpass critical ecosystem thresholds or result in 
dramatic transformations of the physical environment 
of a system may present limits to adaptation. 

Social Barriers to Adaptation 

Agricultural producers routinely plan for and manage 
seasonal weather and weather-related events, but 
projected increases in weather variability, and frequency 
and intensity of weather events associated 
with climate change present novel risk-management 
challenges. The increased complexity and projected 
changes in the variability and intensity of temperature 
and precipitation are likely to challenge both 
the structure and function of individual enterprises 
and possibly the U.S. agricultural system as a whole; 
however, adaptation efforts may be hampered if producers 
do not recognize the value of taking adaptive 
action to prevent loss. 

Social and cultural limits to adaptation are determined 
by individual and group experience, shared 
values, beliefs, and world views (Adger et al. 2007). 
Social adaptation barriers represent a significant 
challenge to climate change adaptation in U.S. 
agriculture. The perception of the need for adaptation 
is influenced by access to finance (Knutson et 
al. 2011), political norms and values (Roser-Renouf 
and Nisbet 2008; Malka et al. 2009; Borick et al. 
2011; McCright and Dunlap 2011), and culture and 
religious ideologies (Wardekker et al. 2009; Kahan 
2012). For example, a recent survey of 1,276 Iowa 
farmers revealed that 32% believed there was insufficient 
evidence of climate change or that climate 
change is not occurring (Arbuckle 2011). A substantial 
portion of the U.S. public does not perceive that 
solid evidence exists to support global warming or 
are unsure of the evidence (either immediately or in 
the long term), with the level varying over time and 
with the availability of new or different information 
(Leiserowitz 2006; Borick et al. 2011; Leiserowitz et 
al. 2011). 

Research on producer adoption rates of conservation 
best-management practices (BMPs) (Hua et al. 2004; 
Valentin et al. 2004; McCown 2005; Smith et al. 
2007; Prokopy et al. 2008) offers valuable insights 
on the willingness and capacities of producers 
to put in place adaptive management in response 
to changing climate conditions. For example, 
McCown (2005) reports that learning and adoption 
of conservation practices is not simply a function of 
knowledge transfer from scientists to farmers. Many 
interventions assume that objective knowledge is 
sufficient to convince farmers to adopt new practices. 
This assumption overlooks how farmers (and humans 
in general) make decisions, which integrate objective 
fact science, and subjective personal knowledge 
and experiences, though seldom with equal weight 
(Slovic 2010). Producers making risk management 
decisions use a combination of analytical knowledge 
(facts they know) and experiential-affect heuristics 
(the positive or negative feelings, consciously or 
subconsciously, associated with the view of the task) 
in assessing the need for adaptation (Slovic 2010). 

Prokopy (2008) reported that no factors consistently 
determine BMP adoption, based on a meta-analysis 
of 55 studies conducted over 25 years. However 
in some studies, several variables have been 
found to be significant and positively associated 
with BMP adoption rates, including presence of 
younger farmers, higher education levels, more 
income and capital, diverse operations, larger area 
under management, more access to labor, access 
to information, positive environmental attitudes, 
environmental awareness, and utilization of social 
networks. Decisions to adapt to climate change are 
likely to have similar complexity and uncertainties. A 
National Research Council report (NRC 2009) found 
that human dimensions research lags behind research 
investigating the natural climate system, stating that 
the preparation of [climate change] knowledge 
for use in decisionmaking, as well as the effective 
communication of scientific insights to stakeholders, 
lags significantly behind or is entirely inadequate. 

Decisionmakers managing adaptation in an 
agricultural system must make choices within an 
adaptive operating space shaped by government 
policy, economics, and the limits to adaptation. 
Within this context, decisionmakers must consider 
the alternative adaptive actions available, selecting 
the best option and implementing it. The next section 
presents options for assessing the vulnerability 

Chapter 7 

Agricultural producers 
routinely plan for and 
manage seasonal weather 
and weather-related 
events, but projected 
increases in weather 
variability, and frequency 
and intensity of weather 
events associated with 
climate change present 
novel risk-management 
challenges. 


and adaptive capacity of an agricultural system, 
reviews research efforts to develop the educational 
programs and decision tools that producers need 
to effectively manage climate risk, and describes 
specific adaptation options recommended for U.S. 
agriculture. 

Assessing Options, Taking Action 

Taking adaptive action requires stakeholders 
throughout the U.S. agricultural system to make 
decisions about the system under their management 
despite the multidimensional uncertainties created by 
climate change. The place-based nature of adaptation 
adds additional complexities to adaptive responses 
and drives the development of flexible management 
strategies to identify and assess context-specific 
adaptive options rather than prescriptive solutions. 
Adaptation will be more effective if decisionmakers 
have the knowledge, information, and tools they need 
to manage climate risk effectively. 

Research and development efforts to support 
adaptation planning in agriculture are underway. 
These efforts aim to provide agricultural 
decisionmakers with effective methods to assess the 
vulnerability and adaptive capacity of the systems 
under their management, to guide the selection and 
implementation of adaptation options, and to manage 
dynamic systems in a complex decision environment. 
To date, much of this work addresses the regional, 
local, or enterprise scale, and focuses on policy and 
technical support for decisionmaking by producers at 
the field and farm scale. 

Vulnerability Assessment 

Vulnerability assessment aims to estimate the 
exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity of the 
agricultural system of interest in order to quantify 
vulnerability to climate change effects for a specific 
geographic location. Vulnerability assessment is 
typically integrated across multiple scales; national 
or regional climate projections are integrated with 
individual, community, or regional estimates of 
adaptive capacity. Understanding the vulnerability of 
an agricultural system may aid adaptation decisions 
through the identification of system elements at the 
greatest risk of exposure and those most sensitive to 
projected climatic effects, and by clarifying the most 
effective response options to enhance the adaptive 
capacity of the system. 

Bryant et al. (2000) report on a synthesis of 
research investigating the vulnerability of Canadian 
agriculture to climate variability and change 
conducted during the last two decades of the 20th 
century. This early work identified the components 
of agricultural adaptation and elucidated the 
multidimensional, multi-scale, and context-specific 
complexity of the agricultural adaptation decision 
environment (see Table 7.2), highlighted the critical 
role of human agency in agricultural adaptation, and 
established the need for participatory research to 
understand agricultural adaptation to climate change. 

Some key producer perceptions of adaptation to 
climate change emerged from Bryant et al.s (2000) 
work. Many producers were skeptical about the 
reality of projected rates of climate change, but 
they did respond to climatic risks specific to local 
landscape associated with seasonal variability and 
the potential for extreme events during critical crop 
development stages. Most producers expressed a 
high level of confidence in their ability to manage 
climatic variability with available technologies and 
so were not concerned about projected changes in 
climate, although the level of confidence varied 
depending on region and type of enterprise. Bryant 
et al. (2000) challenge producer perceptions that 
the Canadian agricultural sector is well adapted 
to uncertainties in climate, pointing to frequent 
widespread losses and economic hardships associated 
with unexpected weather events and the ongoing 
need for public relief (with disaster payments, crop 
insurance, and the like). They suggest that weather 
variability has declined in importance relative 
to other factors in farm decisionmaking as result 
of improvements in agricultural technology in 
combination with programs that reduce production 
vulnerability and conclude that institutional and 
policy programs that reduce producer vulnerability 
to weather variability may actually serve as a barrier 
to effective adaptive action over the long term (i.e., 
resistance adaptation that inhibits resilience and 
transformation adaptation). 

This early participatory research with Canadian 
producers generated a wealth of knowledge about the 
multidimensional complexity and dynamic nature of 
agricultural vulnerability at the enterprise level, which 
has since been confirmed by more recent research 
in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Europe, and the 
United States (e.g., Reid et al. 2007; Belliveau et al. 
2006; Wolfe et al. 2008; Marshall 2010; Nelson et 
al. 2010a; Nelson et al. 2010b; Reidsma et al. 2010; 
Kenny 2011; Olesen et al. 2011). 

Agricultural vulnerability to climate change 
in Californias Central Valley (Jackson et al. 
2012), Washington State (Miles et al. 2010), and 
the Northeastern U.S. (Wolfe et al. 2008) has 
been evaluated with interdisciplinary case study 

Chapter 7 


approaches using various combinations of emissions 
scenarios to estimate exposure, landscape planning, 
simulation modeling, qualitative analysis of adaptive 
capacity, and adaptation scenarios. The results of 
these studies suggest that agriculture is vulnerable 
to climate change and that sensitivities to climatic 
exposures vary substantially by region and enterprise 
type; however, potential adaptive capacity is high 
and near-term productivity can be maintained 
through a combination of adjustments in agricultural 
practices and government support. 

The vulnerability of agriculture in Californias 
Central Valley was assessed in a detailed case study 
utilizing scenario analysis to explore planning issues 
at the farm and landscape levels over the next 50 
years (Jackson et al. 2009; Jackson et al. 2011). 
Researchers concluded that increased temperatures 
and a more uncertain water supply leave the Central 
Valley highly vulnerable to climate change. A 
comprehensive analysis of three distinct agricultural 
adaptation scenarios suggests measures that integrate 
changes in crop mix, irrigation methods, fertilization 
practices, tillage practices, and land management 
may be the most effective approach to managing 
climate risk. 

In an assessment of regional climate change effects 
and adaptation strategies for Washington State 
(Miles et al. 2010), eight climate-sensitive sectors 
of the State economy, including agriculture, were 
evaluated. Climate change effects on the agriculture 
sector were explored by model simulations of apple, 
potato, and wheat production under different climate 
change scenarios. Results suggest that Washington 
agriculture is vulnerable to climate change effects, 
but productivity can be maintained over the short 
term (i.e., 10-20 years) by adjusting production 
practices and adopting new technologies, by 
improvements in agricultural water management, and 
by State-wide monitoring to gather and interpret data 
on climate change effects (Miles et al. 2010; Stckle 
et al. 2010). 

Research exploring the vulnerability of agriculture 
in the Northeastern U.S. through the end of this 
century suggests that producers, government 
agencies, and others in the region will benefit from 
strategic adaptive actions that anticipate projected 
climate change effects (Wolfe et al. 2008). This 
research found that some producers will likely 
benefit from climate change effects, such as those 
currently producing or willing to shift to better 
adapted crops, those with multi-regional production 
options, those who guess correctly about climate 
and market trends, and those who have the financial 
resources to implement adaptation strategies in 
a timely manner. Wolfe et al. (2008) concluded 
that farmers most vulnerable to climate change 
effects are those without the financial resources to 
adapt, those unwilling or unable to exit from their 
current production system, and those who make 
poor decisions regarding the type and/or timing of 
adaptations. Subsequent research conducted in other 
regions (e.g., Chhetri et al. 2010; Knutson et al. 
2011) report farmer vulnerabilities similar to those 
found by Wolfe et al. (2008). 

Using participatory research methods to explore 
the vulnerability of the grape industry in Canadas 
Okanagan Valley, Belliveau et al. (2006) identified 
multiple climatic and non-climatic factors that 
influence the regions vulnerability to climate change 
(Figure 7.2). They concluded that reducing the 
regions vulnerability to climate change will likely 
require action beyond the control of individual 
producers, and present a diverse mix of technological 
developments, educational programs, and economic 
incentives designed to enhance the capacity of 
Okanagan Valley producers to manage a greater 
range of climatic conditions in the present and reduce 
future vulnerabilities to projected climate changes. 

An Australian study provides an example of an 
innovation in hazards/impact modeling that allows 
the explicit consideration of adaptive capacity in 
the assessment of rural community vulnerability to 
climate change (Nelson et al. 2010 a, b). This new 
method was developed to address the limitations 
presented by standard hazard/impact modeling to 
adaptation planning. For example, because such 
modeling is dominated by a focus on technical 
strategies to reduce exposure and sensitivity to 
climate change, the diverse potential for regional and 
local adaptive capacity is often overlooked. Nelson 
et al. (2010 a) propose a new method that broadens 
the quantitative estimates of rural community 
exposure and sensitivity developed using standard 
hazard/impact modeling through the addition of 
an integrated index of adaptive capacity based on 
a rural-livelihoods framework. This framework 
views decisionmaking as a dynamic response in a 
decision environment shaped by changing access to 
five broadly defined types of capital (human, social, 
natural, physical, and financial). In an application 
of this new method, Nelson et al. (2010b) report 
that Australian rural communities are vulnerable to 
climate variability and change and discuss a complex 
set of interacting environmental, economic, and 
social factors that contribute to this vulnerability. In 
addition, this new assessment approach informed 
the selection of specific adaptive responses likely 
to reduce the vulnerability of rural communities 
through local and regional actions that enhance 
adaptive capacity. 

Chapter 7 


Vulnerability assessment is emerging as a potentially 
powerful tool for decisionmakers seeking to 
understand and manage agricultural adaptation 
processes. Integrated research approaches, like those 
described above, can provide valuable qualitative 
and quantitative information about system exposures 
and sensitivities to climate change effects and the 
capacity for adaptive response. 

Assessing Adaptive Capacity 

Agricultural vulnerability to climate change effects 
can be reduced by enhancing the adaptive capacity of 
the agricultural system. A better understanding of the 
key determinants of adaptive capacity in agricultural 
systems would aid efforts to sustain agricultural 
production and productivity in the face of projected 
increases in the frequency and intensity of climatic 
events (NRC 2010). 

Research and development is underway to 
understand the determinants of agricultural adaptive 
capacity in all its dimensions and to develop 
assessment methods useful to decisionmakers 
operating within an agricultural system. Key 
to the utility of adaptive capacity concepts in 
decisionmaking is to be able to identify critical 
determinants and their links to potential adaptive 
responses in the system of interest (Moser 2008). 
Consistent with the results of research to assess the 
vulnerability of agriculture, this emerging body 
of work suggests that the adaptive capacity of 
agricultural systems is dynamic and determined by 
a complex mix of economic, ecological, and social 
factors that interact with climatic effects across 
multiple dimensions of space and time. 

In an assessment of the adaptive capacity of the 
northeastern United States economy, Moser et al. 

Chapter 7 

Fig. 7.2. A schematic framework of the multiscale factors influencing production-level vulnerability to climate change of grape 
growers and winery operators in the Okanagan Valley of Canada. This framework provides specific examples of the socio-economic 
forces interacting with local climate, landscape and enterprise level factors to drive adaptation responses in the agricultural SES 
(Belliveau et al 2006). 


(2008) present the dairy industry as an example of 
the contribution that access to financial resources 
plays in the adaptive capacity of a system. Their 
assessment found that projected climatic changes 
impose additional uncertainty on an already fragile 
dairy industry because of projected changes in 
productivity and production costs. They suggest 
that farmers with the financial resources to respond 
to these uncertainties are in the best position to 
benefit from climate change effects, while others on 
the margin of economic viability may not be able 
to afford to continue in agriculture. Based on this 
assessment, they predict a northward shift of dairy 
production in the Northeast, and a gain in market 
share by larger corporate dairy operations. 

The adaptive capacity of Canadas Prairie 
agricultural system was explored in a project using 
mixed methods to identify and map a quantitative 
index of adaptive capacity useful to regional 
adaptation planning (Swanson et al. 2009). An 
integrated index of 20 quantitative indicators 
representing Smit et al.s (2001) six determinants 
of adaptive capacity was developed, with existing 
data from Statistics Canada sources to represent 
a top-down, conceptually-based approach to the 
assessment of adaptive capacity in the region (Figure 
7.3). Field interviews with producers and producer 
organizations in the region were also conducted to 
develop a set of indicators representing a bottom-up, 
producer-driven assessment of adaptive capacity. 
A comparison of the two approaches confirmed the 
context-specific nature of adaptive capacity and 
the need for site-specific, participatory research 
when exploring adaptation processes; producers in 
the study identified only nine of the 24 indicators 
included in the index as meaningful determinants of 
adaptive capacity. 

The assessment of the adaptive capacity of rural 
communities in Australia provides an example of 
an emerging quantitative approach to the integrated 
geographic analysis of adaptive capacity (Nelson et 
al. 2010 a, b). This method estimates the adaptive 
capacity of the rural agricultural system using farm 
survey data to create an integrated quantitative 
index based on a rural livelihoods framework. This 
framework views decisionmaking as a dynamic 
response within a decision environment shaped 
by changing access to the five types of capital 
(human, social, natural, physical, and financial). 
This integrated analysis of adaptive capacity 

Chapter 7 

Fig. 7.3. Determinants of the Adaptive Capacity of Agriculture to Climate Change in the Canadian Prairie Region: 
The adaptive capacity of the Prairie region agricultural SES was estimated using an integrated framework of indicators 
selected to represent the 6 determinants of adaptive capacity (Swanson et al. 2009). 


enhanced adaptation planning by identifying specific 
community-based factors that limit adaptive capacity 
in rural areas. The identification of specific local 
factors facilitated the collaborative exploration by 
community groups, industry and local governments 
of the tradeoffs between building adaptive capacity 
and attaining other goals associated with specific 
adaptive actions and was useful to regional natural 
resource management plann ing. 

In a comprehensive analysis of the adaptive capacity 
of Australian agriculture, Howden et al. (2003) 
identified three key strategies that governments 
might use to reduce risk and capture opportunities 
presented by climate change. These include use of 
participatory methods to develop improved cost/ 
benefit analyses of adaptation options; develop 
socioeconomic and cultural/institutional structures 
to support more resilient agricultural systems; and 
use adaptive management strategies to cope with the 
inherent uncertainties in adaptation efforts. 

Adaptive capacity assessment holds much promise as 
a useful approach to managing adaptation to climate 
change in agricultural systems. To take effective 
adaptive action, decisionmakers need specific 
information about how adjustments in resources 
are likely to influence the adaptive capacity of the 
system under management, both now and in the 
future. The next section turns to adaptive actions that 
have been taken or are likely to be effective at the 
enterprise-level in the U.S. agricultural system. 

Incremental Adaptation: Extending Existing 
Production Practices 

Agriculture has a long history of successful 
adaptation to varying environmental conditions 
through adjustments in crop and livestock 
management practices that prevent losses of 
productivity. While producer adaptations to climate 
variability and change are not well documented 
in the United States, during the last 25 years 
agricultural producers in Canada, Europe, Australia, 
and New Zealand report success using existing 
management practices to cope with increases in 
seasonal variability of temperature and precipitation, 
and extreme weather events (Bryant et al. 2000; 
Harrington and Lu 2002; Reid et al. 2007; Marshall 
2010; Kenny 2011; Olesen et al. 2011, Rogovska 
and Cruse 2011). These researchers suggest that this 
past success in managing climatic variability has 
contributed to the confidence expressed by these 
producers in their ability to manage future climatic 
variability with available agricultural technologies, 
policies and programs. Table 7.2 presents examples 
of potential actions that could be taken by producers, 
agribusiness, and government to address specific 
climate change adaptation drivers. Many of these 
options are extensions of existing practices that 
serve to increase enterprise resistance or resilience to 
climate change effects. 

Research and development efforts to address climate 
change effects on U.S. agriculture have largely 
focused on investigating single-factor climate change 
effects (e.g., increased CO2, ozone, temperature, or 
water availability) at cell (metabolic) and wholeplant 
and animal scales (e.g., Hatfield et al. 2011; 
Izaurralde et al. 2011). Although adaptation is not 
directly investigated in these studies, the results 
are often extended to include recommendations for 
agricultural adaptation options at the enterprise scale. 

Crop scientists routinely recommend a combination 
of changes in management practices (e.g., timing 
of field operations, cultivar selection, or irrigation 
management), and development of CO2 responsive 
and stress tolerant germplasm as resistance and 
resilience adaptation strategies for crop production; 
however, crop-specific constraints are often 
recognized (see Chapter 5). 

More transformative adaptive options involve 
altering species of crops grown at a given location, 
and the northward migration of crops (see Chapter 
5). New strategies are under development to manage 
the rapid evolution of climate ready cropping 
systems including: a shift from fixed technological 
packages to the participatory design of cropping 
systems for specific locales; the integration of 
environmental and social goals into cropping 
system design criteria; a shift from field scale to 
multi-scale design; and the addition of resilience 
design-objectives to accommodate increased climatic 
variability and change (Wery and Langeveld, 2010). 
These strategies typically involve the use of cropping 
systems modeling as a design and assessment tool, 
coupled with multi-criteria, indicator-based analysis 
at the field, farm and landscape scales, risk analysis 
to account for variable climate conditions and the 
use of participatory approaches that utilize local 
knowledge of agriculture and natural resources 
and facilitate the community-based exploration of 
the trade-offs between the multiple functions of 
agriculture. 

Adaptation options for managing novel crop pest 
and disease management challenges may involve 
increased use of pesticides, new strategies for 
preventing rapid evolution of pest resistance to 
chemical control agents, development of new 
pesticide products, and improved pest and disease 
forecasting. Adaptation options that may increase 

Chapter 7 


resilience of agricultural systems to changes in 
pest pressures include crop diversification and 
management of biodiversity at both field and 
landscape scale to suppress pest outbreaks and 
pathogen transmission (see Chapter 4). 

Recommended adaptive responses by livestock 
producers managing for resistance or resilience to 
climate change focus on obtaining the appropriate 
education and training required to understand and 
manage animal needs, potential stress levels, and 
options for reducing stress, as well as developing an 
adaptive management plan, and selecting animals 
and management strategies compatible with the 
production enterprise. Transformative adaptations 
may include a transition to livestock species or 
breeds that have greater tolerance of relatively high 
temperatures and that are more capable of utilizing 
existing vegetation and more resistant to novel 
pests and diseases (see Chapter 4). Wolfe et al. 
(2008) recommend a variety of low-, medium-, and 
high-cost adaptation measures for dairy production 
systems in the Northeast, including practices that 
reduce heat stress, changes to feed composition and 
feeding schedules, and planning for adequate water 
supplies. In a recent review of climate change effects 
on forage and rangeland production, Izaurralde et 
al. (2011) recommend a conversion to integrated 
crop/livestock farming systems as a transformative 
strategy to reduce detrimental environmental 
impacts, improve profitability and sustainability, and 
enhance ecological resilience to climate change in 
U.S. livestock production systems. 

Sustainable natural-resource management strategies 
inform effective adaptation options for U.S. 
agriculture. The ability of healthy soils to regulate 
water resource dynamics at farm and watershed 
scales is widely recognized and particularly 
critical for the maintenance of crop and livestock 
productivity under conditions of variable and 
extreme weather events. Soil conservation practices 
like cover cropping, diversifying annual cropping 
systems, inclusion of perennial crops in rotations, 
changing from annual to perennial crops, organic soil 
amendments, grazing management, conversion of 
cropland to pasture, agroforestry and natural areas, 
and wetland restoration may enhance the resilience 
of the U.S. agricultural system to climate change 
effects (see Chapter 5). 

In recent years, a number of reports suggest that 
U.S. agricultural systems may be able to enhance 
resilience and reduce climate risk by adopting 
sustainable agriculture practices (Hendrickson et al. 
2008; Jackson et al. 2010; NRC 2010; Izaurralde 
et al. 2011; Lin 2011; Merrill et al. 2011; Tomich 
et al. 2011). A transition to knowledge-intensive, 
low-input, resilient production systems has been 
identified as an effective means of managing climate 
risk in New Zealand agriculture (Kenny 2011). 
International development programs routinely 
recommend development of sustainable agriculture 
systems as a proactive, cost-effective climate risk 
management approach in less developed economies 
(IAASTD 2009; FAO 2010; World Bank 2011). For 
example, the United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO 2010) recommends a number of 
sustainable agricultural practices that reduce climate 
risk and may have application to U.S. agricultural 
systems. These include intercropping within a crop 
rotation or in agro-forestry systems; improved water 
harvesting and retention (e.g., in ponds, behind dams, 
through construction of retaining ridges, etc.) and 
water.use efficiency (e.g., in irrigation systems); 
and ecosystem-based management of biodiversity 
to provide pest and disease management, regulate 
microclimate and nutrient cycles, decompose wastes, 
and crop pollination. 

In an exhaustive review of more than 300 recent 
publications addressing climate change issues in 
European agriculture, Iglesias et al. (2011) linked 
specific agricultural adaptation actions to key 
risks and opportunities associated with projected 
climate change effects in five agroclimatic zones 
across Europe. Adaptation options at the enterprise 
scale are consistent with those recommended for 
U.S. production systems, such as changes in crop 
management (e.g., cultivar selection, timing of field 
operations, management of landscape biodiversity, 
and increased use of pesticides), improved water 
management (e.g., floodplain and wetlands 
restoration, efficient irrigation, and water harvesting), 
and changes in livestock management (e.g., shelter 
and heat protection, breed selection, grazing regime, 
and timing of breeding). 

Adaptation strategies that extend existing practices 
at the farm level can be very effective over the near 
term; however, if the intent is to resist climate change 
effects in order to maintain an existing farming 
system adapted to previous and more stable climate 
conditions, then this strategy is likely to become 
increasingly costly and may ultimately fail as climate 
change effects intensify. This pattern of investing in 
resistance strategies at the expense of resilience or 
transformation strategies may become maladaptive 
over the longer term and could lead the agricultural 
system into an adaptation trap (Allison and Hobbs 
2004; van Apeldoorn et al. 2011). There is a critical 
need for adaptation assessment tools that inform 
the selection of enterprise-level options along the 
resistance-resilience-transformation spectrum. 

Chapter 7 


Managing Climate Risk: New Strategies for 
Novel Uncertainty 

Decisionmakers in the U.S. agricultural system 
face novel uncertainties if climatic variability and 
change intensify as projected over the next 30 years. 
Adaptation efforts will be enhanced by availability 
of effective climate risk management tools, the 
use of adaptive management strategies, and the 
mainstreaming of climate knowledge throughout the 
multiple dimensions of agriculture decisionmaking. 

Efforts to develop and extend new climate risk 
management tools to enhance the adaptive capacity 
of U.S. agriculture must take into account the 
complex decision environments encountered by 
producers managing climate risk (Reid et al. 2007; 
Brown et al. 2010). Community-based research and 
education led by innovative producers to develop 
strategic planning skills, increase climate awareness, 
improve financial security, and adopt climate tools 
such as seasonal climate forecasts may be effective 
methods to promote farm, landscape, and regional 
adaptive capacity (Marshall 2010; Kenny 2011). 
Collaborative training and transformative learning 
promote flexible decisionmaking and autonomous 
thinking that is most advantageous for managing 
changing environmental conditions (Tarnoczi 2011). 

New decision tools utilizing adaptive management 
practices are being developed to address the novel 
uncertainly and complexity that climate risk presents 
to agricultural management decisions. Natural 
resource managers in Australia can take advantage 
of self-assessment processes to select and monitor 
the effect of sustainable practices on the adaptive 
capacity of systems under their management (Brown 
et al. 2010). A simple on-farm tool is available to 
producers making drought-adaptation decisions in 
rain-fed, field-based livestock production systems 
in Australia (Reid 2009). New planning tools to aid 
Canadian farmers managing climate change and 
climate variability have been developed (Bryant 
et al. 2008). Notable examples of technical efforts 
underway in the United States to encourage use 
of seasonal climate information in enterprise 
management decisions include Agroclimate, a project 
of the Southeast Climate Consortium (Agroclimate 
2011), and Adapt-N, a web-based decision support 
tool that provides field-specific, locally adjusted 
N fertilizer recommendations for corn production 
based on the effects of local early-season weather 
(Moebius-Clune et al. 2011). 

A key strategy to enhance the adaptive capacity 
of the U.S. agricultural system may be the use of 
adaptive management practices to support learning 
by doing (Howden et al. 2007; Easterling et al. 
2007; Carpenter et al. 2009). Adaptive management 
is particularly useful in decision environments 
characterized by high uncertainty and complexity. 
Performance-based management decision tools 
and methods for evaluating adaptive responses 
are needed so as to avoid lost opportunities for 
learning (Howden et al. 2007; Morton 2008; Winsten 
2009). By tracking the successes and failures of 
different adaptation actions, individuals, businesses, 
and institutions can identify effective, efficient, 
and equitable policies and measures. Adaptive 
management promotes the development of more 
robust adaptation strategies over time (Howden et al. 
2007; Preston et al. 2011). 

Mainstreaming climate knowledge to improve 
climate risk management has been proposed as a core 
adaptation strategy in agriculture, as well as in many 
other economic sectors (Howden et al. 2007; Adger 
et al. 2007; Field et al. 2007). Mainstreaming climate 
knowledge improves decisionmaking by ensuring 
that land managers, technical advisors, researchers, 

Chapter 7 

Agriculture and Food Research 
Initiative 

Agriculture and natural resources science for 
climate variability and change adaptation 
strategies for U.S. agriculture are among the 
topics being supported by USDA funding. Several 
projects just underway in 2011 are actively 
researching adaptation strategies for cereal and 
legume crops, livestock, and forestry production 
systems. This work encompasses a number 
of specific disciplines, notably crop breeding, 
climate forecasting, atmospheric dynamics, soil 
science, hydrology, entomology, agricultural 
engineering, sociology, economics, forestry, weed 
sciences, and landscape ecology with significant 
efforts to conduct field trials and build extensive 
data bases that enable life-cycle analyses and 
other systems analysis methodologies. Several 
research projects are explicitly connected to 
the development of national agricultural policy, 
adaptive management tools for farmers, and 
education to develop the next generation of 
scientists to address the dynamic and complex 
problems of climate and agriculture. 


private businesspeople, and government program 
managers and policymakers are aware of current 
and projected climate effects, and can access best 
management practices to reduce risks and capture 
opportunities. Taking such a comprehensive, climate 
risk management approach to agricultural adaptation 
offers great potential to promote effective adaptive 
action by decisionmakers throughout the multiple 
dimensions of U.S. agriculture. 

Conclusions 

The increasing pace of climatic change, the complex 
interactions between the global climate system, 
ecosystems and social systems, and the complexity 
of climate change adaptation processes presents 
a novel challenge to the sustainability of U.S. 
agricultural system. Current climate change effects 
are challenging agricultural management and are 
likely to require major adjustments in production 
practices over the next 30 years and projected climate 
changes over the next century have the potential to 
transform U.S. agriculture. Taking adaptive action to 
avoid the damages and capitalize on the opportunities 
presented by climate change requires stakeholders 
throughout the U.S. agricultural system to make 
decisions about the system under their management 
despite the multidimensional uncertainties associated 
with a changing climate. The place-based nature of 
adaptation adds additional complexities to adaptation 
planning and assessment and drives the development 
of flexible management strategies to identify and 
assess context-specific adaptive options rather 
than prescriptive solutions. A climate-ready U.S. 
agricultural system will depend on easy access to 
useable climate knowledge, improved climate risk 
management strategies, effective adaptation planning 
and assessment methods, and the development of 
more resilient production systems. 

Risk Assessment and Climate Change:
An Overview 

There is uncertainty associated with many of the 
steps necessary to assess the effects of climate 
change on agriculture. Some of that uncertainty 
arises because the science of estimating climate 
change is complex and continuously evolving. Other 
sources of uncertainty arise from an incomplete 
understanding of the effects of a multitude of climate 
variables and conditions on crop and livestock 
growth and development. The practice of anticipating 
human adaptation behavior in the future is inherently 
uncertain; observations of past behavior provide a 
good starting point, but advances in communication, 
information, and technology may fundamentally alter 
future conditions, and decisionmaking options, in 
ways that are not easy to predict. 

The lack of certainty about the expected effects of 
climate change complicates decisionmaking about 
how, and when, to develop adaptive strategies or 
invest in mitigating technologies. Nevertheless, 
decisions are made under uncertainty on a daily 
basis; a thunderhead on the horizon does not render 
us paralyzed with indecision about whether to carry 
an umbrella, for instance. Without consciously 
realizing it, we weigh the likelihood that it will rain, 
together with the costs of carrying an umbrella and 
our aversion to getting wet, and reach a decision. 
While that particular decision is relatively trivial, the 
same tools and processes can be applied to dissect 
much more complex problems, arriving at decisions 
of far greater importance in a systematic way despite 
the presence of uncertainty. 

Risk management is the field of decisionmaking 
that refines the tools and processes used in 
situations with risky or uncertain outcomes in 
order to allow decisionmakers to manage the risk 
associated with a full suite of potential outcomes. 
A number of generalities emerge from the field of 
risk management that can be useful in climate and 
adaptation planning: 

Risk management weighs outcomes as a function 
of both likelihood and consequence. As a result, 
outcomes with a low probability (or likelihood) of 
occurrence but a very high negative effect can be 
of as much import in the decisionmaking process as 
outcomes with a high probability of occurrence but a 
low negative effect. In the context of climate change, 
design and incorporation into decisionmaking of lowprobability, 
high-impact potential outcomes, based 
on expert assessment of the literature, is not fear 
mongering but a necessary part of representing the 
range of outcomes under management consideration. 
Such outcomes may or may not influence the 
management path ultimately chosen, depending on 
the relative effects, probabilities of occurrence, and 
management options available. 

Because there are many possible outcomes in risky 
situations, a management path chosen now may 
not be the optimal one given the outcome that 
actually materializes. When faced with a number of 
possible outcomes, it may be preferable to design 
management strategies based on a consideration of 
how they perform over a range of those outcomes, 
rather than selecting strategies based on a single 
most likely or high impact outcome. 

Chapter 7 

Taking adaptive action 
to avoid the damages 
and capitalize on the 
opportunities presented 
by climate change 
requires stakeholders 
throughout the U.S. 
agricultural system to 
make decisions about 
the system under their 
management despite 
the multidimensional 
uncertainties associated 
with a changing climate. 


When there are irreversible costs associated with 
taking action now, there may be a value associated 
with waiting and acquiring additional information 
before accepting irreversible costs when the outcome 
is uncertain (Antle and Capalbo 2010). This option 
value captures the irreversible costs that can be 
avoided if a management decision is postponed until 
more information is acquired and uncertainty in the 
management decision is reduced. 

Even in the absence of irreversible management 
investments and costs, there is a value to information 
that reduces uncertainty and enables improved 
management decisionmaking over the remaining 
uncertainty in outcomes. 

Comprehensive risk management in the context of 
climate change would allow a subjective examination 
of the risk-weighted costs and benefits of 
launching various adaptation strategies, including 
potential investments in early-response systems, 
adaptation technologies, communication and 
research infrastructure, capacity building, etc., given 
uncertainty about which climate and impact scenario 
will ultimately emerge. The approach requires the 
quantification of an enormous amount of information 
about potential climate outcomes, their probability of 
occurrence, and their effects, however. Few efforts 
have been made to develop such comprehensive 
quantification efforts in the context of climate 
change. 

Chapter 7 


Agriculture in the United States has followed a 
path of continual adaptation to a wide range 
of factors driving change both from within 
and outside of agricultural systems. Agriculture is a 
social-ecological system (SES). The complex relationships 
among different commodities, production 
practices, institutions, and stakeholders have enabled 
successful adaptation to past levels of climate variability 
and gradual changes in climate, as well as to 
other environmental, economic, and policy-environment 
changes and consumer purchase behavior. As a 
result, agriculture in the United States over the past 
century has steadily increased its productivity and 
integration into world markets. 

The expected increases in frequency, duration, and 
intensity of weather events driven by changing 
climate present novel and unprecedented challenges 
to the sustainability of U.S. agriculture. Past 
experience with agricultural production under a 
relatively stable climate has created a sense of 
confidence in management decisions; faced with 
a problem, a producer or land manager could turn 
to a time-tested response. With few exceptions, 
climate was expected to follow well-established 
boundaries of temperature and precipitation. The 
response was formulated by the producer and 
resulted in changes of land use and/or management 
decisions. With increasing uncertainty about weather 
and future climate projections, a novel sense of 
uncertainty is being introduced into agriculture. 
Producers are faced with new types of climatedriven 
problems; and there is a lack of knowledge 
and experience-derived responses from which to 
formulate new management strategies. As a result, 
climate is expected to become a more significant 
factor in future decisionmaking by producers 
and other land managers, scientists and technical 
advisors, agribusiness, and policymakers. While 
past management decisions have largely focused 
on adjusting to mean values of precipitation and 
temperature, future decisions will likely require 
a greater emphasis on managing high levels of 
uncertainty, and planning for and adjusting to the 
extremes. 

Furthermore, climate change effects on U.S. 
agriculture cannot be fully examined or understood 
without consideration of their global context. Climate 
change is a global phenomenon that is affecting the 
global agricultural system of which U.S. agriculture 
is a part. Climate-driven yield reductions and, in 
some cases, enhancements, in different regions will 
affect world markets, sometimes to the benefit, and 
sometimes to the deficit of other countries with 
competing production. Less developed countries are 
expected to have less capacity for adapting to climate 
change and thus, even in the short-term, there are 
likely to be significant effects on global hunger and 
well-being. Additionally, risk exists of relocating 
pests and pathogens in agricultural products exported 
to world markets from their native habitats, thus 
creating a demand for increased vigilance by 
inspectors at the Nations entry ports. 


Chapter 8 

Conclusions and Research Needs 


Fig. 8.1.The hills are alive with the sounds of pollinating insects, 
and thats exactly what technicians Rebekah Andrus (left) and 
Olivia Messinger are netting in a field near the Wellsville Mountains 
(Utah). Image courtesy ARS. 

With increasing 
uncertainty about 
weather and future 
climate projections, 
a novel sense of 
uncertainty is being 
introduced into 
agriculture. Producers 
are faced with new 
types of climate-driven 
problems; and there 
is a lack of knowledge 
and experience-derived 
responses from which 
to formulate new 
management strategies. 


For the near future, adaptation by agriculture to 
changing climate will likely continue the existing 
fluid, gradual pace driven primarily by producer-level 
adaptive actions to manage increased variability and 
extreme weather events. The effectiveness of nearterm, 
producer-level adaptations to the novel risks 
associated with climate change will be enhanced by 
new knowledge, technology, policies, and programs 
that both contribute to managing climate risk at the 
enterprise level and assist with avoiding actions that 
might reduce future adaptive capacity. These climate 
risk management strategies will likely involve both 
short-term and longer term adaptation planning 
that takes into account the projected exposures and 
specific sensitivities of different production systems. 
Many short-term adaptive actions at the producer 
level will likely involve extensions of existing 
management strategies to reduce the risk of weather 
variability to agricultural productivity. 

The concept of vulnerability provides a useful 
framework from which to manage the complexities 
of adapting agriculture to climate change. Effective 
adaptation requires understanding and adjusting one 
(or more) of the three determinants of agricultural 
system vulnerability to climate change. These 
include agricultural system: (1) exposure to changing 
climate conditions, (2) sensitivity to changing 
climate conditions, and (3) capacity for effective 
adaptive action. The sections that follow summarize 
the findings and conclusions of this report with 
respect to these three elements (exposure, sensitivity, 
and adaptive capacity) of agricultural vulnerability to 
a changing climate. 

Exposure to Changing Climate 
Conditions 

Agricultures exposure to climate change will depend 
on the trajectory of global greenhouse gas emissions 
in the coming decades and on how those emissions 
ultimately translate into a changing climate. Efforts 
to estimate such projections have a high degree of 
uncertainty, related to uncertain assumptions about 
factors such as population increases and extent of 
emissions mitigation efforts, as well as to uncertainty 
in the science of climate change. Nevertheless, it is 
very likely that U.S. climate conditions will continue 
to change throughout the 21st century, largely driven 
by overall emissions of GHGs and aerosols, as well 
as due to the strength of feedbacks in the climate 
system. Looking ahead to 2100, a low-emissions 
scenario is likely to produce summer-time warming 
of 3C to 4C degrees in much of the Interior West 
(excluding coastal areas), with warming of 2C 
to 3C almost everywhere else. A high-emissions 
scenario is likely to result in warming of 5C to 
6C in much of the Interior West and Midwest, with 
warming of 3C to 5C degrees in the Southeast and 
far western regions, and significant increases in hot 
nights during the summer. 

Projected changes in precipitation for North America 
are more uncertain because they are sensitive to both 
local conditions, as well as to shifts in large-scale 
circulation patterns. The seasonality of precipitation 
is an important factor for agriculture, particularly 
in western regions that rely on winter accumulation 
of snow and gradual release of water stored in 
snowpack throughout the spring and summer. Most 
regions of the northern and central United States are 
projected to see an increase of 5% to 15% in winter 
precipitation over the next 30-40 years; areas along 
the southern border will likely see decreases of 5% 
to 10%, with southern Texas possibly experiencing 
decreases of up to 15% to 20%. Projections of 
change in summer precipitation over the next 30 to 
40 years show that the Northwest is likely to become 
noticeably drier, with reductions of 15% to 25% in 
summertime precipitation. Much of the central South 
will likely sees decreases of about 5%, while some 
northern central and eastern U.S. regions are projected 
to experience increases of 5% to 15%. Over 
the Midwest, springtime precipitation is expected to 
increase with the potential for more intense storms. It 
is important to note, however, that increased precipitation 
does not necessarily translate into more available 
moisture for agriculture at the time when the 
water is needed; changes in timing and distribution 
of precipitation will be critical determinants of water 
availability and management options under changing 
climate conditions. 

Sensitivity to Changing Climate 
Conditions 

The effects of climate change on agricultural 
production can be classified as either direct or 
indirect. Direct effects refer to the biophysical effects 
of changing abiotic climate conditions on crop and 
livestock growth, development, and conditions. 
Indirect effects include biotic effects  effects arising 
from changing agro-ecosystem conditions related 
to insect, disease and weed pressure  as well as 
induced effects on input resources (land, water, soil) 
and market-mediated effects on input and output 
prices. 

Chapter 8 


Plant response to climate change is dictated by a 
complex set of interactions to CO2, temperature, 
solar radiation, and precipitation. To date, research 
has focused on single factors in controlled 
environments, creating considerable uncertainty 
about climate change effects on crop production. 
Changes in average climate conditions are important, 
as are changes in the timing and incidence of extreme 
climate events. Each crop species has a given set 
of temperature thresholds that define the upper and 
lower boundaries for growth along with an optimum 
temperature, with critical periods of exposure to 
temperatures such as the pollination stage when 
pollen is released to fertilize the plant and trigger 
development of reproductive organs, for fruit, grain, 
or fiber (Hatfield et al. 2011). The effects of higher 
temperatures on the quality of crop production 
is not well understood, but of particular concern 
to specialty crops; the value of specialty crops is 
derived not just by tonnage but also by the quality of 
the harvested product, such as the size of a peach, the 
red blush on an apple, or the bouquet of a red wine 
produced from a particular vineyard. Extreme events 
may also reduce the efficiency of farm inputs by 
reducing the flexibility of timing of farm operations 
and applications (Tubiello et al. 2007). 

While increasing CO2 in the atmosphere has a positive 
effect on plant growth and decreases soil water 
use rates (Kimball 2011), the magnitude of influence 
of increasing atmospheric CO2 on crop yields also 
depends on the status of other constraints such as 
nutrient and water limitations, and timing of crop 
exposure to temperature and water extremes. Further, 
the overall effects on crop production, depends on 
the relative response of the crop versus the response 
of most weeds and other competitors for resources; 
changes in climate will affect both the crop and the 
pathogen, and understanding these changes will be 
critical to avoid increased losses in crop productivity. 
Quality of crop may also be affected; in forage 
and grain crops, exposure to increased CO2 causes a 
reduction in grain and forage quality (Morgan et al. 
2004). 

Livestock agriculture is similarly affected through 
direct climate impacts on the animals, the resources 
that they rely on, and their management costs. Abiotic 
climate impacts on animals are directly related 
to the ability to maintain a body temperature within 
the optimum range for growth and reproduction. Furthermore, 
conception rates decline with increasing 
levels of the Thermal Heat Index (THI) (Hahn 1995; 
Amundson et al. 2006). While a portion (estimated to 
be about 50%) of the declines of domestic livestock 
production during hotter summers can be offset by 
increased production due to milder winter conditions, 
loss of productivity, as reflected in increased time to 
slaughter weight or decreased dairy milk production, 
has been estimated to represent significant costs to 
producers (Frank et al. 2001). Positive changes to 
winter THI levels will not offset summer declines 
in conception rates, particularly in cattle that breed 
primarily in spring and summer. 

While climate change impact analysis has primarily 
focused on such direct, abiotic impacts, the limited 
amount of research on indirect effects of climate 
change suggests indirect impacts are likely to be 
significant in both the crop and livestock sectors. The 
most common projections for pest insects, pathogens, 
and viral diseases are expanded or shifted ranges 
with increasing temperature (Gutierrez et al. 2006; 
Diffenbaugh et al. 2008; Mika et al. 2008; Gutierrez 
et al. 2009; Savary, 2011; Canto et al. 2009; Navas- 
Castillo et al. 2011). Warming temperatures may lead 
to additional insect generations in a single season, 
resulting in increased insect abundance and faster 
development of pesticide resistance. 

Weeds are also likely to thrive under changing climate 
conditions. The habitable zone of many weed 
species is largely determined by temperature, and 
weed scientists have long recognized the potential for 
northward expansion of weed species ranges as the 
climate changes (Patterson et al. 1999). Furthermore, 
many weeds respond more positively to increasing 
CO2 than most cash crops. To date, for all weed/ 
crop competition studies where the photosynthetic 
pathway is the same, weed growth is favored as CO2 
increases (Ziska and Teasdale 2000; Ziska and Bunce 
1998). Recent research suggests that glyphosate, 
the most widely used herbicide in the United States, 
loses its efficacy on weeds grown at CO2 levels that 
likely will occur in the coming decades (Ziska et al. 
1999). 

Indirect impacts of climate change on animal agriculture 
will play out through forage and feed markets as 
well as through biotic impacts of disease and other 
pests. Regional warming and changes in rainfall distribution 
may lead to changes in the spatial or temporal 
distributions of diseases sensitive to moisture, 
such as anthrax, blackleg, hemorrhagic septicemia, 
and vector-borne diseases (Baylis and Githeko 2006). 
Climate change also may influence the abundance 
and/or distribution of the competitors, predators, and 
parasites of vectors themselves (Thornton 2010). 
Hotter weather may increase the incidence of ketosis, 
mastitis, and lameness in dairy cows, and enhance 

Chapter 8 

The effects of higher 
temperatures on the 
quality of crop production 
is not well understood, 
but of particular concern 
to specialty crops; the 
value of specialty crops 
is derived not just by 
tonnage but also by the 
quality of the harvested 
product, such as the 
size of a peach, the red 
blush on an apple, or 
the bouquet of a red 
wine produced from a 
particular vineyard. 


growth of mycotoxin-producing fungi, particularly 
if moisture conditions are favorable (Gaughan et al. 
2009). 

The impacts of climate change on forage and feed 
price, availability, and quality are mixed and sensitive 
to climate projection. It is likely that rising CO2 
concentrations over the last 150 years have increased 
productivity of pastures (Polley et al. 2003; Izaurralde 
et al. 2011) and that future climatic conditions 
will enhance productivity on most rangelands 
over the next 30 years (Izaurralde et al. 2011). 
However, increased CO2 concentrations may also 
affect forage crop quality (Morgan et al. 2004) and 
the projected impacts of climate change on feed price 
are highly sensitive to uncertain climate projections 
and crop yield assumptions. 

Climate change will also indirectly affect agriculture 
through its impacts on soil and water resources 
as well as on the ecosystem services upon which 
agricultural productivity relies. Future changes in the 
climatic drivers of soil erosion (e.g., changes in the 
intensity of rainfall) and enterprise-level management 
adaptations to a changing climate (e.g., crop 
selection and dates of planting, harvest, and tillage), 
for instance, have the potential to greatly influence 
soil erosion rates, with a general trend in the United 
States toward higher rates of erosion. Increased rates 
of erosion can decrease soil productivity through 
increased loss of soil organic carbon and other essential 
nutrients, as well as reduced soil water storage 
capacity. 

An improved understanding of potential biotic and 
other indirect and induced impacts is therefore a 
critical element of a comprehensive climate risk 
assessment for agriculture. A notable element of 
the indirect effects of climate change is an expected 
increase of input costs for the management of insects, 
weeds, and pathogens. 

Capacity of the Agricultural System to 
Adapt to Changing Climate Conditions 

For the short term, the dynamics of the agricultural 
system will likely enable it to respond to climate 
changes in ways that partially offset the negative 
direct and indirect effects of climate change, while 
taking advantage of new opportunities that may arise 
through changing climate. Such adaptive behaviors 
can occur at multiple levels of the agricultural 
system, for example at the enterprise level (through 
shifts, expansion, or intensification of production), 
the market level (through changing patterns of trade 
and consumption), and/or at the policy level (through 
programs that spread risk and support adaptive 
responses). 

Adaptation by the plant sector will encompass potential 
strategies ranging from altering planting dates, 
selecting cultivars with different maturity ratings, 
utilizing more water-efficient crops and supplemental 
irrigation to offset precipitation deficits, or changing 
crop types and cropping patterns for a given location. 
Annual crops have more flexibility in adaptation 
strategies than perennial crops. The economic 
investment into perennial vine and tree crops and 
the expected lifetime of perennial crops will prove 
to be more challenging for adaptation because of the 
length of time required to develop new cultivars and/ 
or to introduce more adapted perennial plants into a 
region. Some adaptation strategies for perennial trees 
that have a specific chilling requirement may require 
development of chemical methods to mimic chilling 
hours. Adaptation strategies to cope with the direct 
impacts of abiotic stress will be different than strategies 
to address biotic stresses from insects, diseases, 
and weeds. One of the first approaches to offset 
the biotic stresses will be increased surveillance of 
emerging pest populations. 

Adaptation of the animal production sector could 
involve a shift to livestock types with greater tolerance 
of relatively high temperatures which better 
utilize existing vegetation, and are more resistant to 
livestock pests (Morgan 2005). Preparing for climate 
change will require appropriate education and training, 
development of strategic plans for adjusting to 
changing conditions, recognition of animal needs 
and potential stress levels, adopting strategies to 
minimize and/or mitigate the stress, and selection of 
animals and management strategies that are compatible 
with the production enterprise (Gaughan 2009). 
Livestock managers will need to be proactive and 
consider resource availability (feed, water, health 
care, economic factors, the land base, human capital, 
and the animals) when selecting climate change 
adaptation strategies. 

Economic impact research suggesting that domestic 
agricultural markets and producer and consumer 
welfare will remain relatively stable in the short-term 
despite changing climate conditions usually assumes 
that producers take successful adaptive actions, such 
as those described above. While such studies can 
be interpreted to indicate that the United States has 
a couple of decades  a buffer period  before the 
impacts of climate change will be sufficiently intense 

Chapter 8 


to create large disruptions in the agricultural system, 
such results must be interpreted in the context of 
recognized limits to their analyses. Most existing climate 
change impact studies, for instance, are limited 
in scope, relying on an assessment of only one or two 
direct yield impacts, while excluding indirect impacts 
and interactions between impacts, such as changes 
in pest and disease pressures that can significantly 
decrease productivity and increase management costs 
in crops and livestock. 

In addition, integrated economic analyses have 
focused on the impacts of average changes in 
temperature and precipitation patterns; however, 
the sensitivity of an agricultural system to climate 
change is a function of financial capacity to withstand 
increasing variability in production and returns, 
including catastrophic loss (Smit and Skinner 2002; 
Beach et al. 2010). A failure to consider the impacts 
of variability and extreme weather events on crop 
yields and farm returns, as well as potential credit 
and other resource constraints that limit a systems 
technical and financial ability to adapt, may underestimate 
the systems financial viability in the face 
of changing climate conditions. On the other hand, 
ongoing research and technology investment, such 
as breeding for drought-tolerant crops, management 
to improve ecosystem resilience to climate impacts 
and the use of adaptive management strategies may 
produce additional opportunities for adaptation that 
will increase the capacity of the system to respond to 
regional changes in climate conditions. 

In the longer term, continuing changes in climate 
conditions are likely to overwhelm the ability of the 
agricultural system to adapt using existing technologies 
without significant disruptions to elements of 
the agricultural system such as producer welfare, 
consumer welfare, or the ecosystem services that 
support, and are impacted by, agricultural production. 

Agricultural adaptation to climate change is challenged 
by the increasing pace of change, the complex 
interactions between the global climate system 
and the agricultural system, and the complexity of 
adaptation processes (Easterling et al. 2007). To date, 
U.S. agricultural research and development efforts 
have focused on improving adaptive capacity at the 
enterprise-level; however, strengthening adaptive 
capacity solely at this level may not be sufficient to 
successfully address the challenge of climate change 
(Burton and Lim 2005; Howden et al. 2007). 

Mainstreaming climate knowledge has been proposed 
as a core adaptation strategy in agriculture as 
well as many other economic sectors (Howden et al. 
2007; Adger et al. 2007; Field et al. 2007). Mainstreaming 
climate knowledge improves adaptive 
capacity of the agricultural system by ensuring that 
land managers, technical advisors, researchers, private 
businesspeople, government program managers, 
and policymakers are aware of current and projected 
climate impacts and can access best management 
practices to reduce risks and capture opportunities. 
Taking such a comprehensive, climate risk management 
approach to agricultural adaptation offers 
great potential to promote effective adaptive action 
by decisionmakers throughout the multiple dimensions 
of U.S. agriculture. Building a climate-ready 
U.S. agricultural system will require easy access to 
useable climate knowledge, improved climate risk 
management strategies, new processes to support 
effective adaptive actions, and development of resilient 
production systems (Howden et al. 2007). 

Research Needs 

Agricultural research, especially publically funded 
agricultural research, is a well-documented contributor 
to the success of U.S. agriculture (Fuglie 
and Heisey, 2007). Publically and privately funded 
research will provide innovations needed for agriculture 
to adapt to changing climate. 

The research needs identified in this report are categorized 
below within a vulnerability framework and 
address specific actions that would serve to improve 
understanding and management of the exposure, 
sensitivity, and adaptive capacity of U.S. agriculture 
to climate change. Attention to these research needs 
would enhance the ability of the U.S. agriculture 
sector to anticipate and respond to the challenges 
presented by changing climate conditions. 

Some overarching research needs include the 
following: 

 Improve projections of future climate conditions 
for time scales of seasons to multiple decades, 
including more precise information about changes 
of average and extreme temperatures, precipitation, 
and related variables (e.g., evapotranspiration, 
soil moisture). 

 Evaluate the sensitivity of diverse plant and 
animal production systems to key direct and indirect 
climate change effects and their interactions. 

Chapter 8 

In the longer term, 
continuing changes in 
climate conditions are 
likely to overwhelm the 
ability of the agricultural 
system to adapt using 
existing technologies 
without significant 
disruptions to elements 
of the agricultural system 
such as producer welfare, 
consumer welfare, or 
the ecosystem services 
that support, and are 
impacted by, agricultural 
production. 


 Develop and extend the knowledge, management 
strategies and tools needed by U.S. agricultural 
stakeholders to enhance the adaptive capacity of 
plant and animal production systems to climate 
variability and extremes. While existing management 
and agronomic options have demonstrated 
significant capacity for expanding adaptation 
opportunities, new adaptive management strategies, 
robust risk management approaches, and 
breeding and genetic advances offer much potential, 
but have yet to be evaluated. 

Understanding Exposure 

The vulnerability of an agricultural system to climate 
change is dependent in part on the character, magnitude 
and rate of climate variation to which a system 
is exposed. Effective adaptation will be enhanced by 
research to: 

 Improve projections of future climate conditions 
for time scales of seasons to multiple decades, 
including more precise information about changes 
of average and extreme temperatures, precipitation, 
and related variables (e.g., evapotranspiration, 
soil moisture). Such projections are needed 
to better understand exposure to climate risks, 
and support effective assessment, planning, and 
decision-making across the multiple dimensions 
of the U.S. agricultural system. 

 Enable projection of future climate conditions 
at finer temporal scales (hourly and daily versus 
weekly, monthly, or annual averages) and spatial 
scales (1-10 km, as opposed to 50-100 km). This 
finer scale information would permit decisionmakers 
from many parts of the agricultural system 
to examine the potential effects of climate change 
on specific crop and livestock production systems 
in specific regions. There is also a need to include 
more precise decadal-scale projections to integrate 
climate information into longer term planning and 
improved information about the probability of 
potential changes to effectively manage climate 
risks. 

 Develop the modeling systems that produce 
climate and impact projections through the use 
of standard socioeconomic scenarios and access 
to more accurate, complete, and integrated 
observations of climate change and its effects 
on agricultural systems to improve process-level 
understanding and validate model simulations. 

 Improve the accuracy and range of weather 
predictions (as opposed to longer-term, scenariodependent 
climate projections) and seasonal forecasts. 
Better forecasts are needed to understand 
near-term exposure and support tactical decisionmaking 
at all levels of the agricultural system. 
Improved forecasting is particularly critical 
given the expected increases in the variability of 
weather and the incidence of extreme conditions. 

Understanding Sensitivity 

The nature and degree of response to key climate 
change drivers determines the sensitivity of the 
agricultural system to climate change effects. Critical 
thresholds, feedbacks, and synergies operating 
at multiple temporal and spatial scales complicate 
efforts to assess agricultural system sensitivity to climate 
change. Effective adaptation to climate change 
effects will be enhanced by research to: 

 Improve understanding of both direct and indirect 
climate change effects and their interactions on 
plant and animal production systems, together 
with new tools for exploring their dynamic interactions 
throughout the multiple dimensions of the 
U.S. agricultural sector; 

 Enhance capabilities to quantify and screen plant 
and animal response to water and temperature 
extremes; 

 Improve understanding of climate change effects 
on the natural and biological resources upon 
which agricultural productivity depends, particularly 
soil and water resources; 

 Improve understanding of climate change effects 
on existing agricultural landscape patterns and 
production practices; 

 Improve understanding of the economic impacts 
of climate change and how those impacts are 
distributed. 

 Develop improved integrated assessment models 
and establish ecosystem manipulation sites to 
enable experiments that examine the impacts of 
simultaneous interacting multiple stresses on plant 
and animal production systems. 

Chapter 8 


Enhancing Adaptive Capacity 

Because agricultural systems are human-dominated 
ecosystems, the vulnerability of agriculture to climate 
change is strongly dependent on the responses 
taken by humans to adapt to climate change effects. 
The adaptive capacity of U.S. agriculture will be 
enhanced by research to: 

 Improve understanding of the key determinants 
(social, economic, and ecological) of adaptive 
capacity and resilience in agricultural systems; 

 Develop effective methods for the assessment of 
adaptive capacity; 

 Identify and extend information about existing 
best management practices that offer no-regrets 
and low regrets adaptation options; 

 Develop resilient crop and livestock production 
systems and the socio-economic and cultural/ 
institutional structures needed to support them; 
Develop and extend adaptive management 
strategies and climate risk management tools to 
improve decision-making throughout the U.S. 
agricultural sector; 

 Improve understanding of the social limits to 
adaptation, including the effects of cost/benefit 
considerations, technological feasibility, beliefs, 
values and attitudes, and resource constraints on 
adaptive response. 

 Develop effective adaptation planning and assessment 
strategies useful to decision makers operating 
throughout the multiple dimensions of the 
U.S. agricultural system. 

Understanding Basic Processes 

Agricultural systems are notable for the complex 
interactions between the physical, biological, and 
chemical environment; climate plays a major role 
in affecting these basic processes. With additional 
research, we could advance our understanding of 
effects that climate has on agriculture. Some outstanding 
research needs are sketched out below. 
While not exhaustive, this list indicates some of the 
types of information that could advance our foundational 
knowledge of how the agroecosystem works, 
and also provide insight on the impacts of changing 
climate on this system. 

 One critical environmental service is pollination. 
Lacking basic knowledge in this area makes it 
difficult to assess the potential response to climate 
change. 

 Future crop yield increases will depend largely 
on our abilities to increase yield potential. To 
increase yield potential, an evaluation must be 
made as to the necessity of more targeted varietal 
selection designed with specific global change 
factors in mind (e.g., high temperatures, or deficit 
soil water). Alternatively, it may be that the best 
crop yield choice is to opt for a more generalized 
yield selection based on existing conditions, doing 
so with the expectation that enough new cultivars 
will be produced approximately every 7 years that 
will allow producers to manage in the face of a 
changing environment. 

 Scientific understanding of crop response to 
changes in CO2, temperature, ozone, water and 
other environmental factors affected by climate 
change is far from complete; understanding these 
responses will guide genetic improvement. 

 Linking physiological responses to genomic traits 
in plants will provide a level of understanding for 
potential resilience mechanisms to climate stress. 

 More rapid generation turnover methods and 
effective selection criteria will be needed to make 
progress in developing perennial cultivars that can 
best adapt to changing climate. Marker-selected 
breeding techniques and other molecular tools 
will be needed for climate adaptation, as well as 
improved water use efficiency. 

 Development of more robust methods of quantifying 
environmental stress on animals and differences 
among animal production systems will 
be required to define the parameters of adaptive 
systems capable of avoiding stresses caused by 
climate change. 

 Understanding the fundamental role of environment 
variables on pest population dynamics will 
be necessary to define the potential role of climate 
change on the indirect impacts caused by pests. 

Chapter 8 


Climate Change and Sustainable 
Agriculture 

The direct and indirect effects of climate change 
on agriculture will challenge the Nations ability to 
attain the four goals of agriculture sustainability as 
described by a National Academies of Science report 
(2010): 

 Satisfy human food, feed, and fiber needs, and 
contribute to biofuel needs; 

 Enhance environmental quality and the resources 
base; 

 Sustain economic viability of agriculture; and 

 Enhance the quality of life for farmers, farm 
workers, and society as a whole. 

Effective adaptation to climate change will be 
necessary for U.S. agriculture to achieve these goals 
during the 21st century. Successful adaptation planning 
requires both an improved understanding of 
the potential system-wide impacts of climate change 
and opportunities for adaptation, as well as more 
effective methods of managing the novel uncertainty 
associated with the management of the U.S. agricultural 
system under a changing climate. 

 

Chapter 8 


Appendix A 

References Cited (by Chapter) 

Chapter 1 References 

CCSP, 2008. The effects of climate change on agriculture, land 
resources, water resources, and biodiversity in the United States. A 
report by the U.S. Climate Change Science Program and the Subcommittee 
on Global Change Research. P. Backlund, A. Janetos, S. 
Schimel, J. Hatfield, K. Boote, P. Fay, L. Hahn, C. Izaurralde, B.A. 
Kimball, T. Mader, J. Morgan, D. Ort, W. Polley, A. Thomson, 
D. Wolfe, M. Ryan, S. Archer, R. Birdsey, C. Dahm, L. Heath, J. 
Hicke, D. Hollinger, T. Huxman, G. Okin, R. Oren, J. Randerson, 
W. Schlesinger, D. Lettenmaier, D. Major, L. Poff, S. Running, L. 
Hansen, D. Inouye, B.P. Kelly, L. Meyerson, B. Peterson, R. Shaw 
362 pp. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, USA. 

IPCC, 2007a. Summary for policymakers, in S. Solomon, et al. (ed.), 
Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Contribution of 
Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York, USA. 

Chapter 2 References 

Allison, H.E., and R.J. Hobbs., 2004. Resilience, adaptive capacity, 
and the lock-in trap of the Western Australian agricultural region. 
Ecology and Society, 9(1): 3. 

Arbuckle, J.G.J., 2011. Farmer perspectives on climate change and 
agriculture, paper presented at Climate Change Conference, 
November 1-3, 2011. Heartland Regional Water Coordination 
Initiative, Lied Conference Center, Nebraska City, NE. 

Atwell, R.C., L.A. Schulte, and L.M. Westphal, 2008. Linking resilience 
theory and diffusion of innovations theory to understand the 
potential for perennials in the U.S. corn belt. Ecology and Society, 
14(1): 30. 

Dessai, S., M. Hulme, R. Lempert, and R. Pielke, 2009. Climate 
prediction: A limit to adaptation?, in W.N. Adger, I. Lorenzoni 
and K.L. OBrien (eds.), Adapting to climate change: Thresholds, 
values, governance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New 
York. 

Dimitri, C., A. Effland, and N. Conklin, 2005. The 20th century transformation 
of U.S. agriculture and farm policy. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Economic Information 
Bulletin No. 14. 

Easterling, W.E., 2009. Guidelines for adapting agriculture to climate 
change, in D. Hillel and C. Rosenzweig (eds.), Handbook of 
climate change and agroecosystems: Impacts, adaptation, and 
mitigation. Imperial College Press; Distributed by World Scientific 
Publishing Co., London; Singapore; Hackensack, NJ. 

Easterling, W.E., P.K. Aggarwal, P. Batima, K.M. Brander, L. Erda, 
S.M. Howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, J.-F. Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, 
and F.N. Tubiello, 2007. Food, fibre and forest products, in 
M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. Van Der Linden and 
C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability: Working group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, pp. 273-313. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 

Gunderson, L.H., and C.S. Holling, 2002. Panarchy: Understanding 
transformations in human and natural systems. Island Press, 
Washington, DC. 

Hatfield, J.L., K.J. Boote, B.A. Kimball, L.H. Ziska, R.C. Izaurralde, 
D. Ort, A.M. Thomson, and D. Wolfe, 2011. Climate impacts on 
agriculture: Implications for crop production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 351-370. 

Hatfield, J.L., and J.H. Prueger, 2011. Spatial and temporal variation in 
evapotranspiration, in G. Gerosa (ed.) Evapotranspiration - from 
measurements to agricultural and environmental applications, p. 
410. InTech. 

Hendrickson, J., G.F. Sassenrath, D. Archer, J. Hanson, and J. Halloran, 
2008. Interactions in integrated U.S. agricultural systems: 
The past, present and future. Renewable Agriculture and Food 
Systems, 23 (Special Issue 04): 314-324. 

Hoppe, R.A., P. Korb, E. ODonoghue, and D.E. Banker, 2007. Structure 
and finances of U.S. farms: Family farm report, 2007, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service Economic 
Information Bulletin No. 24. 

Hoppe, R.A., J.M. MacDonald, and P. Korb, 2010. Small farms in the 
United States: Persistence under pressure. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Economic Information 
Bulletin No. 63. 

Howden, M., A. Ash, S. Barlow, T. Booth, S. Charles, B. Cechet, S. 
Crimp, R. Gifford, K. Hennessy, R. Jones, M. Kirschbaum, G. 
McKeon, H. Meinke, S. Park, B. Sutherst, L. Webb, and P. Whetton, 
2003. An overview of the adaptive capacity of the Australian 
agricultural sector to climate change  options, costs and benefits. 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Collingwood, 
Victoria http://www.cse.csiro.au/publications/2003/AGOAgClimateAdaptationReport.
pdf. 

Howden, S.M., J.F. Soussana, F.N. Tubiello, N. Chhetri, M. Dunlop, 
and H. Meinke, 2007. Adapting agriculture to climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(50): 
19691-19696. 

Jackson, L., M. van Noordwijk, J. Bengtsson, W. Foster, L. Lipper, M. 
Pulleman, M. Said, J. Snaddon, and R. Vodouhe, 2010. Biodiversity 
and agricultural sustainability: From assessment to adaptive 
management. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 
2(1-2): 80-87. 

Janssen, M.A., . Bodin, J.M. Anderies, T. Elmqvist, H. Ernstson, 
R.R.J. McAllister, P. Olsson, and P. Ryan, 2006. Toward a network 
perspective of the study of resilience in social-ecological systems. 
Ecology and Society, 11(1): 15. 

Lin, B.B., 2011. Resilience in agriculture through crop diversification: 
Adaptive management for environmental change. BioScience, 
61(3): 183-193. 

Littell, J.S., D. McKenzie, B.K. Kerns, S. Cushman, and C.G. Shaw, 
2011. Managing uncertainty in climate-driven ecological models to 
inform adaptation to climate change. Ecosphere, 2(9): art102. 

Liu, J., R. Munang, M. Rivington, J. Thompson, P.V. Gardingen, and 
D. Dinesh, 2011. Restoring the natural foundation to sustain a 
green economy: A century-long journey for ecosystem management. 
International Ecosystem Management Partnership, United 
Nations Environmental Program Policy Brief 6. http://www.unep. 
org/ecosystemmanagement/Portals/7/Documents/policy%20 
series%206.pdf. 


McLeman, R., D. Mayo, E. Strebeck, and B. Smit, 2008. Drought 
adaptation in rural eastern Oklahoma in the 1930s: Lessons for 
climate change adaptation research. Mitigation and Adaptation 
Strategies for Global Change, 13(4): 379-400. 

McLeman, R., and B. Smit, 2006. Vulnerability to climate change 
hazards and risks: Crop and flood insurance. The Canadian Geographer, 
50(2): 217+. 

Medvigy, D., and C. Beaulieu, 2011. Trends in daily solar radiation 
and precipitation coefficients of variation since 1984. Journal of 
Climate, 25(4): 1330-1339. 

Melhim, A., E.J. ODonoghue, and C.R. Shumway, 2009. Do the largest 
firms grow and diversify the fastest? The case of U.S. dairies. 
Review of Agricultural Economics, 31(2): 284-302. 

Melhim, A., E.J. ODonoghue, and C.R. Shumway, 2009. What does 
initial farm size imply about growth and diversification? Journal of 
Agricultural and Applied Economics, 41(1): 193-206. 

Moriondo, M., C. Pacini, G. Trombi, C. Vazzana, and M. Bindi, 2010. 
Sustainability of dairy farming system in Tuscany in a changing 
climate. European Journal of Agronomy, 32(1): 80-90. 

Munang, R.T., I. Thiaw, and M. Rivington, 2011. Ecosystem management: 
Tomorrows approach to enhancing food security under a 
changing climate. Sustainability, 3(7): 937-954. 

Nelson, D.R., W.N. Adger, and K. Brown, 2007. Adaptation to environmental 
change: Contributions of a resilience framework. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 32: 395-419. 

Nelson, R., P. Kokic, S. Crimp, P. Martin, H. Meinke, S.M. Howden, 
P. de Voil, and U. Nidumolu, 2010. The vulnerability of Australian 
rural communities to climate variability and change: Part IIintegrating 
impacts with adaptive capacity. Environmental Science & 
Policy, 13(1): 18-27. 

New, M., A. Lopez, S. Dessai, and R. Wilby, 2007. Challenges in using 
probabilistic climate change information for impact assessments: 
An example from the water sector. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 
365(1857): 2117-2131. 

Newton, A., S. Johnson, and P. Gregory, 2011. Implications of climate 
change for diseases, crop yields and food security. Euphytica, 
179(1): 3-18. 

NRC, 2010. Toward sustainable agricultural systems in the 21st 
century. . National Research Council Committee on Twenty-First 
Century Systems, Agriculture, National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C. 

ODonoghue, E.J., R.A. Hoppe, D.E. Banker, R. Ebel, K. Fuglie, P. 
Korb, M. Livingston, C. Nickerson, and C. Sandretto, 2011. The 
changing organization of U.S. farming, 77 pp. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Economic Information 
Bulletin No. 88. 

Ostrom, E., 2009. A general framework for analyzing sustainability of 
social-ecological systems. Science, 325(5939): 419-422. 

Pan, Z., M. Segal, R.W. Arritt, and E.S. Takle, 2004. On the potential 
change in solar radiation over the U.S. due to increases of atmospheric 
greenhouse gases. Renewable Energy, 29(11): 1923-1928. 

Qian, T., A. Dai, and K.E. Trenberth, 2007. Hydroclimatic trends in the 
Mississippi River Basin from 1948 to 2004. Journal of Climate, 
20(18): 4599-4614. 

Reidsma, P., F. Ewert, A.O. Lansink, and R. Leemans, 2010. Adaptation 
to climate change and climate variability in European agriculture: 
The importance of farm level responses. European Journal of 
Agronomy, 32(1): 91-102. 

Rivington, M., K.B. Matthews, G. Bellocchi, K. Buchan, C.O. Stckle, 
and M. Donatelli, 2007. An integrated assessment approach to conduct 
analyses of climate change impacts on whole-farm systems. 
Environmental Modelling & Software, 22(2): 202-210. 

Robertson, G.P., and S.M. Swinton, 2005. Reconciling agricultural 
productivity and environmental integrity: A grand challenge for 
agriculture. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 3(1): 38-46. 

Rockstrom, J., W. Steffen, K. Noone, A. Persson, F.S. Chapin, E.F. 
Lambin, T.M. Lenton, M. Scheffer, C. Folke, H.J. Schellnhuber, 
B. Nykvist, C.A. de Wit, T. Hughes, S. van der Leeuw, H. Rodhe, 
S. Sorlin, P.K. Snyder, R. Costanza, U. Svedin, M. Falkenmark, 
L. Karlberg, R.W. Corell, V.J. Fabry, J. Hansen, B. Walker, D. 
Liverman, K. Richardson, P. Crutzen, and J.A. Foley, 2009. A safe 
operating space for humanity. Nature, 461(7263): 472-475. 

Romero, C., and A. Agrawal, 2011. Building interdisciplinary frameworks: 
The importance of institutions, scale, and politics. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(23): E196. 

Rounsevell, M.D.A., D.T. Robinson, and D. Murray-Rust, 2012. From 
actors to agents in socio-ecological systems models. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
367(1586): 259-269. 

Smith, P., and J.E. Olesen, 2010. Synergies between the mitigation of, 
and adaptation to, climate change in agriculture. The Journal of 
Agricultural Science, 148(05): 543-552. 

Stanhill, G., and S. Cohen, 2001. Global dimming: A review of the 
evidence for a widespread and significant reduction in global radiation 
with discussion of its probable causes and possible agricultural 
consequences. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 107(4): 
255-278. 

Stanhill, G., and S. Cohen, 2005. Solar radiation changes in the United 
States during the twentieth century: Evidence from sunshine duration 
measurements. Journal of Climate, 18(10): 1503-1512. 

Tomich, T.P., S. Brodt, H. Ferris, R. Galt, W.R. Horwath, E. Kebreab, 
J.H.J. Leveau, D. Liptzin, M. Lubell, P. Merel, R. Michelmore, 
T. Rosenstock, K. Scow, J. Six, N. Williams, and L. Yang, 2011. 
Agroecology: A review from a global-change perspective. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 36(1): 193-222. 

Trostle, R., D. Marti, S. Rosen, and P. Westcott, 2011. Why have food 
commodity prices risen again? U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Economic Research Service. 

van Apeldoorn, D.F., K. Kok, M.P.W. Sonneveld, and T. Veldkamp, 
2011. Panarchy rules: Rethinking resilience of agroecosystems, 
evidence from Dutch dairy-farming. Ecology and Society, 16(1). 

Walker, B., S. Carpenter, J. Anderies, N. Abel, G. Cumming, M. Janssen, 
L. Lebel, J. Norberg, G.D. Peterson, and R. Pritchard, 2002. 
Resilience management in social-ecological systems: A working 
hypothesis for a participatory approach. Conservation Ecology, 6: 
14. 

Wolfe, D., L.H. Ziska, C. Petzoldt, A. Seaman, L. Chase, and K. 
Hayhoe, 2008. Projected change in climate thresholds in the northeastern 
U.S.: Implications for crops, pests, livestock, and farmers. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 13(5): 
555-575. 

USDA-National Agriculture Statistics Service 2007. Census of Agriculture. 
(www.agcensus.usda.gov) accessed 29-Jun-2012 

Young, O.R., F. Berkhout, G.C. Gallopin, M.A. Janssen, E. Ostrom, 
and S. van der Leeuw, 2006. The globalization of socio-ecological 
systems: An agenda for scientific research. Global Environmental 
Change, 16(3): 304-316. 

Chapter 3 References 

Alexander, L.V., X. Zhang, T.C. Peterson, J. Caesar, B. Gleason, 
A.M.G. Klein Tank, M. Haylock, D. Collins, B. Trewin, F. 
Rahimzadeh, A. Tagipour, K. Rupa Kumar, J. Revadekar, G. 
Griffiths, L. Vincent, D.B. Stephenson, J. Burn, E. Aguilar, M. 
Brunet, M. Taylor, M. New, P. Zhai, M. Rusticucci, and J.L. 
Vazquez-Aguirre, 2006. Global observed changes in daily climate 
extremes of temperature and precipitation. Journal of Geophysical 
Research, 111(D5). 

Appendix A 


Allison, I., N.L. Bindoff, R.A. Bindschadler, P.M. Cox, N. de Noblet, 
M.H. England, J.A. Francis, N. Gruber, A.M. Haywood, D.J. 
Karoly, G. Kaser, C. Le Qur, T.M. Lenton, M.E. Mann, B.I. 
McNeil, A.J. Pitman, S. Rahmstorf, E. Rignot, H.J. Schellnhuber, 
S.H. Schneider, S.C. Sherwood, R.C.J. Somerville, K. Steffen, 
E.J. Steig, M. Visbeck, and A.J. Weaver, 2009. The Copenhagen 
diagnosis, 2009: Updating the world on the latest climate science., 
60 pp. University of New South Wales Climate Change Research 
Centre (CCRC). 

Booker, F.L., R. Muntifering, M.T. McGrath, K.O. Burkey, D.R. 
Decoteau, E.L. Fiscus, W. Manning, S.V. Krupa, A. Chappelka, 
and D.A. Grantz, 2009. The ozone component of global change: 
Potential effects on agricultural and horticultural plant yield, 
product quality and interactions with invasive species. Journal of 
Integrative Plant Biology, 51: 337-351. 

Dentener, F., D. Stevenson, K. Ellingsen, T. Van Noije, and M. Schultz, 
2010. Hemispheric transport of air pollution 2010. Part A: Ozone 
and particulate matter. United Nations, New York. 

Dentener, F., D. Stevenson, K. Ellingsen, T. Van Noije, M. Schultz, M. 
Amann, C. Atherton, N. Bell, D. Bergmann, I. Bey, L. Bouwman, 
T. Butler, J. Cofala, B. Collins, J. Drevet, O.R. Doherty, B. Eickhout, 
H. Eskes, A. Fiore, M. Gauss, D. Hauglustaine, L. Horowitz, 
I. Isaksen, B. Josse, M. Lawrence, M. Krol, J.F. Lamarque, V. 
Montanaro, J.F. Muller, V.H. Peuch, G. Pitari, J. Pyle, J. Rodriguez, 
M. Sanderson, N.H. Savage, D. Shindell, S. Strahan, S. Szopa, K. 
Sudo, R. Vandingenen, O. Wild, and G. Zeng, 2006. The global 
atmospheric environment for the next generation. Environmental 
Science and Technology, 40: 3586-3594. 

Emmons, L.K., S. Walters, P.G. Hess, J.F. Lamarque, G.G. Pfister, 
D. Fillmore, C. Granier, A. Guenther, D. Kinnison, T. Laepple, 
J. Orlando, X. Tie, G. Tyndall, C. Wiedinmyer, S.L. Baughcum, 
and S. Kloster, 2010. Description and evaluation of the model 
for ozone and related chemical tracers, version 4 (MOZART-4). 
Geosci. Model Dev., 3(1): 43-67. 

Groisman, P.Y., R.W. Knight, D.R. Easterling, T.R. Karl, G.C. Hegerl, 
and V.N. Razuvaev, 2005. Trends in intense precipitation in the 
climate record. Journal of Climate, 18(9): 1326-1350. 

Hansen, J.E., R. Ruedy, M. Sato, and K. Lo, 2012. NASA GISS surface 
temperature (GISTEMP) analysis, in Trends: A compendium 
of data on global change. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis 
Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of 
Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A. 

IPCC, 2007a. Summary for policymakers, in S. Solomon, et al. (eds.), 
Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Contribution of 
Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York, USA. 

IPCC, 2007b. Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K.; New York. 

Jones, P.D., D.H. Lister, T.J. Osborn, C. Harpham, M. Salmon, and 
C.P. Morice, 2012. Hemispheric and large-scale land-surface air 
temperature variations: An extensive revision and an update to 
2010. J. Geophys. Res., 117(D5): D05127. 

Karl, T.R., and R.W. Knight, 1998. Secular trends of precipitation 
amount, frequency, and intensity in the United States. Bulletin of 
the American Meteorological Society, 79(2): 231-241. 

Lamarque, J.-F., G.P. Kyle, M. Meinshausen, K. Riahi, S.J. Smith, 
D.P. Vuuren, A.J. Conley, and F. Vitt, 2011. Global and regional 
evolution of short-lived radiatively-active gases and aerosols in the 
representative concentration pathways. Climatic Change, 109(1-2): 
191-212. 

Matsuura, and Willmott, 2009. Data courtesy of University of Delaware, 
based on augmented global historical climatology network, 
version 2. 

Maurer, E.P., L. Brekke, T. Pruitt, and P.B. Duffy, 2007. Fine-resolution 
climate projections enhance regional climate change impact 
studies. EOS, 88(47): 504. 

Meehl, G.A., C. Tebaldi, G. Walton, D. Easterling, and L. McDaniel, 
2009. Relative increase of record high maximum temperatures 
compared to record low minimum temperatures in the U.S. Geophysical 
Research Letters, 36(23). 

Meehl, G.A., T.F. Stocker, W.D. Collins, P. Friedlingstein, A.T. Gaye, 
J.M. Gregory, A. Kitoh, R. Knutti, J.M. Murphy, A. Noda, S.C.B. 
Raper, I.G. Watterson, A.J. Weaver, and Z.-C. Zhao, 2007. Global 
climate projections, in S. Solomon, et al. (eds.), Climate change 
2007: The physical science basis. Contribution of working group 
I to the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, pp. 747-845. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 

Nakicenovic et al. 2000. Special report on emissions scenarios: A 
special report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New 
York. 

NOAA NCDC, 2011. State of the climate: Global analysis for annual 
2011. NOAA National Climatic Data Center http://www.ncdc.noaa. 
gov/sotc/global/2011/13. 

Prather, M., G. Gauss, T. Berntsen, I. Isaksen, J. Sundet, I. Bey, G. 
Brasseur, F. Dentener, R. Derwent, D. Stevenson, L. Grenfell, D. 
Hauglustaine, L. Horowitz, D. Jacob, L. Mickley, M. Lawrence, 
R. von Kuhlmann, J.-F. Muller, G. Pitari, H. Rogers, M. Johnson, 
J. Pyle, K. Law, M. van Weele, and O. Wild, 2003. Fresh air in the 
21st century? Geophysical Research Letters, 30: 1100. 

Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2003. Soil erosion and runoff 
from cropland report from the USA, 63 pp. Soil and Water Conservation 
Society, Ankeny, IA. 

Solomon, S., G.K. Plattner, R. Knutti, and P. Friedlingstein, 2009. Irreversible 
climate change due to carbon dioxide emissions. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(6): 1704-1709. 

Stevenson, D.S., F.J. Dentener, M.G. Schultz, K. Ellingsen, T.P.C. van 
Noije, O. Wild, G. Zeng, M. Amann, C.S. Atherton, N. Bell, D.J. 
Bergmann, I. Bey, T. Butler, J. Cofala, W.J. Collins, R.G. Derwent, 
R.M. Doherty, J. Drevet, H.J. Eskes, A.M. Fiore, M. Gauss, D.A. 
Hauglustaine, L.W. Horowitz, I.S.A. Isaksen, M.C. Krol, J.F. 
Lamarque, M.G. Lawrence, V. Montanaro, J.F. Mller, G. Pitari, 
M.J. Prather, J.A. Pyle, S. Rast, J.M. Rodriguez, M.G. Sanderson, 
N.H. Savage, D.T. Shindell, S.E. Strahan, K. Sudo, and S. Szopa, 
2006. Multimodel ensemble simulations of present-day and nearfuture 
tropospheric ozone. J. Geophys. Res., 111(D8): D08301. 

US EPA, 2010. Climate change indicators in the United States. EPA 
430r10007 www.epa.gov/climatechange/science/indicators/. 

Zhang, X., F.W. Zwiers, G.C. Hegerl, F.H. Lambert, N.P. Gillett, S. 
Solomon, P.A. Stott, and T. Nozawa, 2007. Detection of human 
influence on twentieth-century precipitation trends. Nature, 
448(7152): 461-465. 

Chapter 4 References 

Adkins, S., C.G. Webster, C.S. Kousik, S.E. Webb, P.D. Roberts, P.A. 
Stansly, and W.W. Turechek, 2011. Ecology and management of 
whitefly-transmitted viruses of vegetable crops in Florida. Virus 
Research, 159(2): 110-114. 

Agrios, G.N., 2005. Plant pathology. Elsevier Academic Press, 
Amsterdam; Boston, MA. 

Ahsan, N., Y. Nanjo, H. Sawada, Y. Kohno, and S. Komatsu, 2010. 
Ozone stress-induced proteomic changes in leaf total soluble 
and chloroplast proteins of soybean reveal that carbon allocation 
is involved in adaptation in the early developmental stage. Proteomics, 
10(14): 2605-2619. 

Appendix A 


Ainsworth, E.A., P.A. Davey, C.J. Bernacchi, O.C. Dermody, E.A. 
Heaton, D.J. Moore, P.B. Morgan, S.L. Naidu, H.-s. Yoo Ra, X.-g. 
Zhu, P.S. Curtis, and S.P. Long, 2002. A meta-analysis of elevated 
[CO2] effects on soybean (glycine max) physiology, growth and 
yield. Global Change Biology, 8(8): 695-709. 

Ainsworth, E.A., and S.P. Long, 2005. What have we learned from 15 
years of free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE)? A meta-analytic review 
of the responses of photosynthesis, canopy properties and plant 
production to rising CO2. New Phytologist, 165(2): 351-372. 

Akey, D.H., B.A. Kimball, and J.R. Mauney, 1988. Growth and 
development of the pink bollworm, Pectinophora gossypiella 
(lepidoptera: Gelechiidae), on bolls of cotton grown in enriched 
carbon dioxide atmospheres. Environmental Entomology, 17(3): 
452-455. 

Alberto, A., L. Ziska, C. Cervancia, and P. Manalo, 1996. The influence 
of increasing carbon dioxide and temperature on competitive 
interactions between a C3 crop, rice (Oryza sativa) and a C4 weed 
(Echinochloa glabrescens). Functional Plant Biology, 23(6): 
795-802. 

Alfaro, E.J., A. Gershunov, and D. Cayan, 2006. Prediction of summer 
maximum and minimum temperature over the central and western 
United States: The roles of soil moisture and sea surface temperature. 
Journal of Climate, 19(8): 1407-1421. 

Altermatt, F., 2010. Climatic warming increases voltinism in European 
butterflies and moths. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 277(1685): 1281-1287. 

Andersen, C., 2003. Source-sink balance and carbon allocation below 
ground in plants exposed to ozone. New Phytologist, 157: 213-228. 

Anderson, P.K., A.A. Cunningham, N.G. Patel, F.J. Morales, P.R. 
Epstein, and P. Daszak, 2004. Emerging infectious diseases of 
plants: Pathogen pollution, climate change and agrotechnology 
drivers. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 19(10): 535-544. 

Awmack, C., R. Harrington, and S. Leather, 1997. Host plant effects 
on the performance of the aphid Aulacorthum solani (kalt.) 
(homoptera: Aphididae) at ambient and elevated CO2. Global 
Change Biology, 3(6): 545-549. 

Bale, J.S., and S.A.L. Hayward, 2010. Insect overwintering in a changing 
climate. Journal of Experimental Biology, 213(6): 980-994. 

Baylis, M., and A.K. Githeko, 2006. T7.3: The effects of climate 
change on infectious diseases of animals. Foresight http://www. 
bis.gov.uk/foresight/our-work/projects/published-projects/ 
infectious-diseases/reports-and-publications. 

Belote, R.T., J.F. Weltzin, and R.J. Norby, 2004. Response of an understory 
plant community to elevated CO2 depends on differential 
responses of dominant invasive species and is mediated by soil 
water availability. New Phytologist, 161(3): 827-835. 

Bergant, K., S. Trdan, D. .nidar.i., Z. .repin.ek, and L. Kajfe.- 
Bogataj, 2005. Impact of climate change on developmental 
dynamics of Thrips tabaci (thysanoptera: Thripidae): Can it be 
quantified? Environmental Entomology, 34(4): 755-766. 

Betts, R.A., P.D. Falloon, K.K. Goldewijk, and N. Ramankutty, 2007. 
Biogeophysical effects of land use on climate: Model simulations 
of radiative forcing and large-scale temperature change. Agricultural 
and Forest Meteorology, 142(24): 216-233. 

Bezemer, T.M., and T.H. Jones, 1998. Plant-insect herbivore interactions 
in elevated atmospheric CO2: Quantitative analyses and guild 
effects. Oikos, 82(2): 212-222. 

Bijoor, N.S., C.I. Czimczik, D.E. Pataki, and S.A. Billings, 2008. 
Effects of temperature and fertilization on nitrogen cycling and 
community composition of an urban lawn. Global Change Biology, 
14(9): 2119-2131. 

Blumenthal, D., R.A. Chimner, J.M. Welker, and J.A. Morgan, 2008. 
Increased snow facilitates plant invasion in mixedgrass prairie. 
New Phytologist, 179(2): 440-448. 

Booker, F., K. Burkey, P. Morgan, E. Fiscus, and A. Jones, 2012. 
Minimal influence of G-protein null mutations on ozone-induced 
changes in gene expression, foliar injury, gas exchange and peroxidase 
activity in Arabidopsis thaliana l. Plant, Cell & Environment, 
35(4): 668-681. 

Booker, F.L., and E.L. Fiscus, 2005. The role of ozone flux and 
antioxidants in the suppression of ozone injury by elevated CO2 in 
soybean. Journal of Experimental Botany, 56(418): 2139-2151. 

Booker, F.L., R. Muntifering, M.T. McGrath, K.O. Burkey, D.R. 
Decoteau, E.L. Fiscus, W. Manning, S.V. Krupa, A. Chappelka, 
and D.A. Grantz, 2009. The ozone component of global change: 
Potential effects on agricultural and horticultural plant yield, 
product quality and interactions with invasive species. Journal of 
Integrative Plant Biology, 51: 337-351. 

Bradley, B.A., 2009. Regional analysis of the impacts of climate 
change on cheatgrass invasion shows potential risk and opportunity. 
Global Change Biology, 15(1): 196-208. 

Bradley, B.A., D.M. Blumenthal, D.S. Wilcove, and L.H.H. Ziska, 
2010. Predicting plant invasions in an era of global change. Trends 
in Ecology and Evolution, 25(5): 310-318. 

Bradshaw, W.E., and C.M. Holzapfel, 2001. Genetic shift in photoperiodic 
response correlated with global warming. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 98(25): 14509-14511. 

Bradshaw, W.E., and C.M. Holzapfel, 2006. Evolutionary response to 
rapid climate change. Science, 312(5779): 1477-1478. 

Bradshaw, W.E., and C.M. Holzapfel, 2010. Insects at not so low temperature: 
Climate change in the temperate zone and its biotic consequences, 
in D.L. Denlinger and R.E. Lee (eds.), Low temperature 
biology of insects. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New 
York. 

Bridges, D.C., and Weed Science Society of America, 1992. Crop 
losses due to weeds in the United States, 1992. Weed Science 
Society of America, Champaign, Ill., USA. 

Bunce, J.A., 1995. Long-term growth of alfalfa and orchard grass plots 
at elevated carbon dioxide. Journal of Biogeography, 22(2/3): 
341-348. 

Bunce, J.A., 2001. Weeds in a changing climate, paper presented at 
International Symposium: Worlds Worst Weeds. British Crop 
Protection Council, Hilton Brighton Metropole Hotel, UK. 

Bunce, J.A., 2004. Carbon dioxide effects on stomatal responses to 
the environment and water use by crops under field conditions. 
Oecologia, 140(1): 1-10. 

Bunce, J.A., 2007. Effects of elevated carbon dioxide on photosynthesis 
and productivity of alfalfa in relation to seasonal changes 
in temperature. Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants, 
13(243-252). 

Butler, G.D., B.A. Kimball, and J.R. Mauney, 1986. Populations of 
Bemisia tabaci (homoptera: Aleyrodidae) on cotton grown in opentop 
field chambers enriched with CO2. Environmental Entomology, 
15(1): 61-63. 

Campbell, C.L., and L.V. Madden, 1990. Introduction to plant disease 
epidemiology. Wiley, New York. 

Canto, T., M.A. Aranda, and A. Fereres, 2009. Climate change effects 
on physiology and population processes of hosts and vectors that 
influence the spread of hemipteran-borne plant viruses. Global 
Change Biology, 15(8): 1884-1894. 

Carter, D.R., and K.M. Peterson, 1983. Effects of a CO2-enriched 
atmosphere on the growth and competitive interaction of a C3 and 
a C4 grass. Oecologia, 58(2): 188-193. 

Cavaleri, M.A., and L. Sack, 2010. Comparative water use of native 
and invasive plants at multiple scales: A global meta-analysis. 
Ecology, 91(9): 2705-2715. 

Appendix A 


Chellemi, D.O., C.G. Webster, C.A. Baker, M. Annamalai, D. Achor, 
and S. Adkins, 2011. Widespread occurrence and low genetic 
diversity of Colombian datura virus in brugmansia suggest an 
anthropogenic role in virus selection and spread. Plant Disease, 
95(6): 755-761. 

Chen, F., G. Wu, F. Ge, M.N. Parajulee, and R.B. Shrestha, 2005. 
Effects of elevated CO2 and transgenic Bt cotton on plant chemistry, 
performance, and feeding of an insect herbivore, the cotton 
bollworm. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata, 115(2): 
341-350. 

Chen, F.J., G. Wu, and F. Ge, 2004. Impacts of elevated CO2 on the 
population abundance and reproductive activity of aphid Sitobion 
avenae fabricius feeding on spring wheat. Journal of Applied 
Entomology, 128(9-10): 723-730. 

Cheng, L., F.L. Booker, K.O. Burkey, C. Tu, H.D. Shew, T.W. Rufty, 
E.L. Fiscus, J.L. Deforest, and S. Hu, 2011. Soil microbial 
responses to elevated CO2 and O3 in a nitrogen-aggrading agroecosystem. 
PLoS ONE, 6(6): e21377. 

Cho, K., S. Tiwari, S.B. Agrawal, N.L. Torres, M. Agrawal, A. 
Sarkar, J. Shibato, G.K. Agrawal, A. Kubo, and R. Rakwal, 
2011. Tropospheric ozone and plants: Absorption, responses, and 
consequences. Reviews of Environmental Contamination and 
Toxicology, 212(61-111). 

Clements, D.R., and A. Ditommaso, 2011. Climate change and weed 
adaptation: Can evolution of invasive plants lead to greater range 
expansion than forecasted? Weed Research, 51(3): 227-240. 

Coakley, S.M., H. Scherm, and S. Chakraborty, 1999. Climate change 
and plant disease management. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 
37: 399-426. 

Craine, J.M., A.J. Elmore, K.C. Olson, and D. Tolleson, 2010. Climate 
change and cattle nutritional stress. Global Change Biology, 
16(10): 2901-2911. 

Crozier, L., 2004. Warmer winters drive butterfly range expansion by 
increasing survivorship. Ecology, 85(1): 231-241. 

Daly, C., M.P. Widrlechner, M.D. Halbleib, J.I. Smith, and W.P. 
Gibson, 2010. Development of a new USDA plant hardiness zone 
map for the United States. Journal of Applied Meteorology and 
Climatology, 51(2): 242-264. 

DeLucia, E.H., C.L. Casteel, P.D. Nabity, and B.F. ONeill, 2008. 
Insects take a bigger bite out of plants in a warmer, higher carbon 
dioxide world. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
105(6): 1781-1782. 

Dentener, F., D. Stevenson, K. Ellingsen, T. Van Noije, M. Schultz, M. 
Amann, C. Atherton, N. Bell, D. Bergmann, I. Bey, L. Bouwman, 
T. Butler, J. Cofala, B. Collins, J. Drevet, O.R. Doherty, B. Eickhout, 
H. Eskes, A. Fiore, M. Gauss, D. Hauglustaine, L. Horowitz, 
I. Isaksen, B. Josse, M. Lawrence, M. Krol, J.F. Lamarque, V. 
Montanaro, J.F. Muller, V.H. Peuch, G. Pitari, J. Pyle, J. Rodriguez, 
M. Sanderson, N.H. Savage, D. Shindell, S. Strahan, S. Szopa, K. 
Sudo, R. Vandingenen, O. Wild, and G. Zeng, 2006. The global 
atmospheric environment for the next generation. Environmental 
Science and Technology, 40: 3586-3594. 

Dermody, O., B. ONeill, A. Zangerl, M. Berenbaum, and E. DeLucia, 
2008. Effects of elevated CO2 and O3 on leaf damage and insect 
abundance in a soybean agroecosystem. Arthropod-Plant Interactions, 
2(3): 125-135. 

Diffenbaugh, N.S., C.H. Krupke, M.A. White, and C.E. Alexander, 
2008. Global warming presents new challenges for maize pest 
management. Environment Research Letters, 3. 

Dukes, J.S., 2000. Will the increasing atmospheric CO2 concentration 
affect the success of invasive species?, in H.A. Mooney and R.J. 
Hobbs (eds.), Invasive species in a changing world. Island Press, 
Washington. 

Dukes, J.S., 2002. Comparison of the effect of elevated CO2 on an 
invasive species (centaurea solstitialis) in monoculture and community 
settings. Plant Ecology, 160(2): 225-234. 

Dukes, J.S., N.R. Chiariello, S.R. Loarie, and C.B. Field, 2011. Strong 
response of an invasive plant species (Centaurea solstitialis l.) to 
global environmental changes. Ecological Applications, 21(6): 
1887-1894. 

Eastburn, D.M., M.M. Degennaro, E.H. Delucia, O. Dermody, and A.J. 
McElrone, 2010. Elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide and ozone 
alter soybean diseases at soyface. Global Change Biology, 16(1): 
320-330. 

Eastburn, D.M., A.J. McElrone, and D.D. Bilgin, 2011. Influence of 
atmospheric and climatic change on plantpathogen interactions. 
Plant Pathology, 60(1): 54-69. 

Erbs, M., R. Manderscheid, G., Jansen, S. Seddig, A. Pacholski, and 
H-J. Weigel. 2010. Effects of free-air CO2 enrichment and nitrogen 
supply on grain quality parameters and elemental composition of 
wheat and barley grown in crop rotation. Agriculture, Ecosystems 
and Environment, 136:59-68. 

Fargette, D., G. Konate, C. Fauquet, E. Muller, M. Peterschmitt, and 
J.M. Thresh, 2006. Molecular ecology and emergence of tropical 
plant viruses, in Annual Review of Phytopathology, pp. 235-260. 
Annual Reviews, Palo Alto. 

Fiscus, E.L., F.L. Booker, and K.O. Burkey, 2005. Crop responses to 
ozone: Uptake, modes of action, carbon assimilation and partitioning. 
Plant, Cell and Environment, 28(8): 997-1011. 

Fiscus, E.L., C.D. Reid, J.E. Miller, and A.S. Heagle, 1997. Elevated 
CO2 reduces O3 flux and O3-induced yield losses in soybeans: Possible 
implications for elevated CO2 studies. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 48(2): 307-313. 

Fuhrer, J., 2003. Agroecosystern responses to combinations of elevated 
CO2, ozone, and global climate change. Agriculture Ecosystems & 
Environment, 97(1-3): 1-20. 

Garrett, K.A., G.A. Forbes, S. Savary, P. Skelsey, A.H. Sparks, C. 
Valdivia, A.H.C. van Bruggen, L. Willocquet, A. Djurle, E. 
Duveiller, H. Eckersten, S. Pande, C.V. Cruz, and J. Yuen, 2011. 
Complexity in climate-change impacts: An analytical framework 
for effects mediated by plant disease. Plant Pathology, 60(1): 
15-30. 

Garrett, K.A., S.P. Dendy, E.E. Frank, M.N. Rouse, and S.E. Travers, 
2006. Climate change effects on plant disease: Genomes to ecosystems, 
in Annual review of phytopathology, pp. 489-509. 

Gaughan, J.B., N. Lacetera, S.E. Valtorta, H.H. Khalifa, L. Hahn, and 
T. Mader, 2009. Response of domestic animals to animal challenges, 
in K.L. Ebi, I. Burton and G.R. Mcgregor (eds.), Biometeorology 
for adaptation to climate variability and change. Springer, 
Dordrecht; London. 

Gomi, T., M. Nagasaka, T. Fukuda, and H. Hagihara, 2007. Shifting 
of the life cycle and life-history traits of the fall webworm in relation 
to climate change. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata, 
125(2): 179-184. 

Gordo, O., and J.J. Sanz, 2006. Temporal trends in phenology of the 
honey bee Apis mellifera (l.) and the small white pieris rapae (l.) 
in the Iberian peninsula (19522004). Ecological Entomology, 
31(3): 261-268. 

Grantz, D.A., and H.-B. Vu, 2009. O3 sensitivity in a potential C4 
bioenergy crop: Sugarcane in California. Crop Science, 49(2): 
643-650. 

Gregory, P.J., S.N. Johnson, A.C. Newton, and J.S.I. Ingram, 2009. 
Integrating pests and pathogens into the climate change/food security 
debate. Journal of Experimental Botany, 60(10): 2827-2838. 

Gutierrez, A., L. Ponti, and Q. Cossu, 2009. Effects of climate warming 
on olive and olive fly (Bactrocera oleae (Gmelin)) in California 
and Italy. Climatic Change, 95(1): 195-217. 

Gutierrez, A., L. Ponti, T. dOultremont, and C. Ellis, 2008. Climate 
change effects on poikilotherm tritrophic interactions. Climatic 
Change, 87(0): 167-192. 

Appendix A 


Gutierrez, A.P., T. DOultremont, C.K. Ellis, and L. Ponti, 2006. Climatic 
limits of pink bollworm in Arizona and California: Effects of 
climate warming. Acta Oecologica, 30(3): 353-364. 

Haag, C.R., M. Saastamoinen, J.H. Marden, and I. Hanski, 2005. 
A candidate locus for variation in dispersal rate in a butterfly 
metapopulation. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological 
Sciences, 272(1580): 2449-2456. 

Hance, T., J. van Baaren, P. Vernon, and G. Boivin, 2007. Impact 
of extreme temperatures on parasitoids in a climate change 
perspective, in Annual review of entomology, pp. 107-126. Annual 
Reviews, Palo Alto. 

Harrington, R., S.J. Clark, S.J. Welham, P.J. Verrier, C.H. Denholm, 
M. Hull, D. Maurice, M.D. Rounsevell, N. Cocu, and European 
Union Examine Consortium, 2007. Environmental change and the 
phenology of European aphids. Global Change Biology, 13(8): 
1550-1564. 

Hatfield, J.L., K.J. Boote, B.A. Kimball, L.H. Ziska, R.C. Izaurralde, 
D. Ort, A.M. Thomson, and D. Wolfe, 2011. Climate impacts on 
agriculture: Implications for crop production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 351-370. 

Hatfield, J.L., and J.H. Prueger, 2011. Spatial and temporal variation in 
evapotranspiration, in G. Gerosa (ed.) Evapotranspiration - From 
measurements to agricultural and environmental applications. 

Httenschwiler, S., and C. Krner, 2003. Does elevated CO2 facilitate 
naturalization of the non-indigenous Prunus laurocerasus in Swiss 
temperate forests? Functional Ecology, 17(6): 778-785. 

Hawkins, B.A., and M. Holyoak, 1998. Transcontinental crashes of 
insect populations? American Naturalist, 162(3): 480-484. 

Heagle, A.S., 2003. Influence of elevated carbon dioxide on interactions 
between Frankliniella occidentalis and Trifolium repens. 
Environmental Entomology, 32(3): 421-424. 

Heagle, A.S., R.L. Brandenburg, J.C. Burns, and J.E. Miller, 1994. 
Ozone and carbon dioxide effects on spider mites in white clover 
and peanut. J. Environ. Qual., 23(6): 1168-1176. 

Hegland, S.J., A. Nielsen, A. Lzaro, A.-L. Bjerknes, and . Totland, 
2009. How does climate warming affect plant-pollinator interactions? 
Ecology Letters, 12(2): 184-195. 

Hill, J.K., H.M. Griffiths, and C.D. Thomas, 2011. Climate change and 
evolutionary adaptations at species range margins. Annual Review 
of Entomology, 56(1): 143-159. 

Himanen, S.J., A. Nissinen, W.-X. Dong, A.-M. Nerg, C.N. Stewart, 
G.M. Poppy, and J.K. Holopainen, 2008. Interactions of elevated 
carbon dioxide and temperature with aphid feeding on transgenic 
oilseed rape: Are bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) plants more susceptible 
to nontarget herbivores in future climate? Global Change 
Biology, 14(6): 1437-1454. 

Holm, L.G., 1997. World weeds : Natural histories and distribution. 
Wiley, New York. 

Holtum, J.A.M., and K. Winter, 2003. Photosynthetic CO2 uptake 
in seedlings of two tropical tree species exposed to oscillating 
elevated concentrations of CO2. Planta, 218(1): 152-158. 

Hoover, J.K., and J.A. Newman, 2004. Tritrophic interactions in the 
context of climate change: A model of grasses, cereal aphids and 
their parasitoids. Global Change Biology, 10(7): 1197-1208. 

Izaurralde, R.C., A.M. Thomson, J.A. Morgan, P.A. Fay, H.W. Polley, 
and J.L. Hatfield, 2011. Climate impacts on agriculture: Implications 
for forage and rangeland production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 371-381. 

Jarvis, P.G., and K.G. McNaughton, 1986. Stomatal control of transpiration: 
Scaling up from leaf to region, in A. Macfadyen and E.D. 
Ford (eds.), Advances in ecological research, pp. 1-49. Academic 
Press. 

Jeffree, C.E., and E.P. Jeffree, 1996. Redistribution of the potential 
geographical ranges of mistletoe and Colorado beetle in Europe in 
response to the temperature component of climate change. Functional 
Ecology, 10(5): 562-577. 

Johnson, R., and D. Lincoln, 1990. Sagebrush and grasshopper 
responses to atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration. Oecologia, 
84(1): 103-110. 

Johnson, R.H., and D.E. Lincoln, 1991. Sagebrush carbon allocation 
patterns and grasshopper nutrition: The influence of CO2 enrichment 
and soil mineral limitation. Oecologia, 87(1): 127-134. 

Johnson, S., and J. McNicol, 2010. Elevated CO2 and aboveground 
belowground herbivory by the clover root weevil. Oecologia, 
162(1): 209-216. 

Jones, R.A.C., 2009. Plant virus emergence and evolution: Origins, 
new encounter scenarios, factors driving emergence, effects 
of changing world conditions, and prospects for control. Virus 
Research, 141(2): 113-130. 

Jones, R.A.C., M.U. Salam, T.J. Maling, A.J. Diggle, and D.J. Thackray, 
2010. Principles or predicting plant virus disease epidemics, in 
N.K. Vanalfen, G. Bruening and J.E. Leach (eds.), Annual review 
of phytopathology, vol 48, pp. 179-203. Annual Reviews, Palo 
Alto. 

Joutei, B.A., J. Roy, G. Van Impe, and P. Lebrun, 2000. Effect of 
elevated CO2 on the demography of a leaf-sucking mite feeding on 
bean. Oecologia, 123(1): 75-81. 

Juroszek, P., and A. von Tiedemann, 2011. Potential strategies and 
future requirements for plant disease management under a changing 
climate. Plant Pathology, 60(1): 100-112. 

Karban, R., and J.S. Thaler, 1999. Plant phase change and resistance to 
herbivory. Ecology, 80(2): 510-517. 

Karl, T., J. Melillo, T. Peterson, and S.J. Hassol (Eds.), 2009. Global 
climate change impacts in the United States. Cambridge University 
Press. 

Karowe, D., and A. Migliaccio, 2011. Performance of the legumefeeding 
herbivore, Colias philodice (lepidoptera: Pieridae) is not 
affected by elevated CO2. Arthropod-Plant Interactions, 5(2): 
107-114. 

Klein, A.-M., B.E. Vaissire, J.H. Cane, I. Steffan-Dewenter, S.A. 
Cunningham, C. Kremen, and T. Tscharntke, 2007. Importance of 
pollinators in changing landscapes for world crops. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 274(1608): 303-313. 

Knowles, N., M.D. Dettinger, and D.R. Cayan, 2006. Trends in 
snowfall versus rainfall in the western United States. Journal of 
Climate, 19(18): 4545-4559. 

Kocmnkov, E., M. Trnka, J. Eitzinger , M. Dubrovsk., P. .t.pnek, 
D. Semerdov, J. Balek, P. Skalk, A. Farda, J. Juroch, and Z. 
.alud, 2011. Estimating the impact of climate change on the 
occurrence of selected pests at a high spatial resolution: A novel 
approach. The Journal of Agricultural Science, 149(02): 185-195. 

Li, Z.-Y., T.-J. Liu, N.-W. Xiao, J.-S. Li, and F.-J. Chen, 2011. Effects 
of elevated CO2 on the interspecific competition between two 
sympatric species of Aphis gossypii and Bemisia tabaci fed on 
transgenic Bt cotton. Insect Science, 18(4): 426-434. 

Lincoln, D.E., and D. Couvet, 1989. The effect of carbon supply on 
allocation to allelochemicals and caterpillar consumption of peppermint. 
Oecologia, 78(1): 112-114. 

Lincoln, D.E., N. Sionit, and B.R. Strain, 1984. Growth and feeding 
response of Pseudoplusia includens (lepidoptera: Noctuidae) to 
host plants grown in controlled carbon dioxide atmospheres. Environmental 
Entomology, 13(6): 1527-1530. 

Lobell, D.B., M. Banziger, C. Magorokosho, and B. Vivek, 2011. 
Nonlinear heat effects on African maize as evidenced by historical 
yield trials. Nature Clim. Change, 1(1): 42-45. 

Appendix A 


Loladze, I., 2002. Rising atmospheric CO2 and human nutrition: 
Toward globally imbalanced plant stoichiometry? Trends in Ecology 
& Evolution, 17(10): 457-461. 

Long, S.P., E.A. Ainsworth, A.D.B. Leakey, and P.B. Morgan, 2005. 
Global food insecurity. Treatment of major food crops with 
elevated carbon dioxide or ozone under large-scale fully open-air 
conditions suggests recent models may have overestimated future 
yields. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 360(1463): 2011-2020. 

Long, S.P., E.A. Ainsworth, A.D.B. Leakey, J. Nsberger, and D.R. 
Ort, 2006. Food for thought: Lower-than-expected crop yield 
stimulation with rising CO2 concentrations. Science, 312(5782): 
1918-1921. 

Malloch, G., F. Highet, L. Kasprowicz, J. Pickup, R. Neilson, and 
B. Fenton, 2006. Microsatellite marker analysis of peach-potato 
aphids (Myzus persicae, homoptera : Aphididae) from scottish suction 
traps. Bulletin of Entomological Research, 96(6): 573-582. 

Margosian, M.L., K.A. Garrett, J.M.S. Hutchinson, and K.A. With, 
2009. Connectivity of the American agricultural landscape: Assessing 
the national risk of crop pest and disease spread. BioScience, 
59(2): 141-151. 

Marks, S., and D.E. Lincoln, 1996. Antiherbivore defense mutualism 
under elevated carbon dioxide levels: A fungal endophyte and 
grass. Environmental Entomology, 25(3): 618-623. 

Matros, A., S. Amme, B. Kettig, G.H. Buck-Sorlin, U.W.E. Sonnewald, 
and H.-P. Mock, 2006. Growth at elevated CO2 concentrations 
leads to modified profiles of secondary metabolites in tobacco cv. 
Samsunnn and to increased resistance against infection with potato 
virus y. Plant, Cell & Environment, 29(1): 126-137. 

May, R.M., and A.P. Dobson, 1986. Population dynamics and the rate 
of evolution of pesticide resistance, in Pesticide resistance: Strategies 
and tactics for management. National Research Council Committee 
on Strategies for the Management of Pesticide Resistant 
Pest Populations, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 

McDonald, A., S. Riha, A. DiTommaso, and A. DeGaetano, 2009. 
Climate change and the geography of weed damage: Analysis of 
U.S. maize systems suggests the potential for significant range 
transformations. Agriculture, Ecosystems, and Environment, 
130(34): 131-140. 

Memmott, J., P.G. Craze, N.M. Waser, and M.V. Price, 2007. Global 
warming and the disruption of plantpollinator interactions. Ecology 
Letters, 10(8): 710-717. 

Mickley, L.J., D.J. Jacob, and B.D. Field, 2004. Effects of future 
climate change on regional air pollution episodes in the United 
States. Geophysical Research Letters, 31: L24103. 

Mika, A.M., and J.A. Newman, 2010. Climate change scenarios and 
models yield conflicting predictions about the future risk of an 
invasive species in North America. Agricultural and Forest Entomology, 
12(3): 213-221. 

Mika, A.M., R.M. Weiss, O. Olfert, R.H. Hallett, and J.A. Newman, 
2008. Will climate change be beneficial or detrimental to the invasive 
swede midge in North America? Contrasting predictions using 
climate projections from different general circulation models. 
Global Change Biology, 14(8): 1721-1733. 

Miller, M., J. Belnap, S. Beatty, and R. Reynolds, 2006. Performance 
of Bromus tectorum l. in relation to soil properties, water additions, 
and chemical amendments in calcareous soils of southeastern Utah, 
USA. Plant and Soil, 288(1): 1-18. 

Morales, F.J., and P.G. Jones, 2004. The ecology and epidemiology 
of whitefly-transmitted viruses in Latin America. Virus Research, 
100(1): 57-65. 

Muntifering, R.B., A.H. Chappelka, J.C. Lin, D.F. Karnosky, and G.L. 
Somers, 2006. Chemical composition and digestibility of trifolium 
exposed to elevated ozone and carbon dioxide in a free air (FACE) 
fumigation system. Functional Ecology, 20: 269-275. 

Musolin, D.L., D. Tougou, and K. Fujisaki, 2010. Too hot to handle? 
Phenological and life-history responses to simulated climate 
change of the southern green stink bug Nezara viridula (heteroptera: 
Pentatomidae). Global Change Biology, 16(1): 73-87. 

Navas-Castillo, J., E. Fiallo-Oliv, and S. Snchez-Campos, 2011. 
Emerging virus diseases transmitted by whiteflies. Annual Review 
of Phytopathology, 49(1): 219-248. 

Newman, J.A., 2005. Climate change and the fate of cereal aphids in 
southern Britain. Global Change Biology, 11(6): 940-944. 

Newman, J.A., 2006. Using the output from global circulation models 
to predict changes in the distribution and abundance of cereal 
aphids in Canada: A mechanistic modeling approach. Global 
Change Biology, 12(9): 1634-1642. 

Newton, P.C.D., H. Clark, C.C. Bell, and E.M. Glasgow, 1996. Interaction 
of soil moisture and elevated CO2 on the above-ground growth 
rate, root length density and gas exchange of turves from temperate 
pasture. Journal of Experimental Botany, 47(6): 771-779. 

ONeill, B.F., A.R. Zangerl, E.H. DeLucia, C. Casteel, J.A. Zavala, and 
M.R. Berenbaum, 2011. Leaf temperature of soybean grown under 
elevated CO2 increases Aphis glycines (hemiptera: Aphididae) 
population growth. Insect Science, 18(4): 419-425. 

Oerke, E.C., 2006. Crop losses to pests. Journal of Agricultural Science, 
144: 31-43. 

Olfert, O., and R.M. Weiss, 2006a. Impact of climate change on potential 
distributions and relative abundances of Oulema melanopus, 
Meligethes viridescens and Ceutorhynchus obstrictus in Canada. 
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 113(14): 295-301. 

Olfert, O., and R.M. Weiss, 2006b. Bioclimatic model of Melanoplus 
sanguinipes (fabricius) (orthoptera: Acrididae) populations in 
Canada and the potential impacts of climate change. Journal of 
Orthoptera Research, 15(1): 65-77. 

Osbrink, W.L.A., J.T. Trumble, and R.E. Wagner, 1987. Host suitability 
of Phaseolus lunata for Trichoplusia ni (lepidoptera: Noctuidae) in 
controlled carbon dioxide atmospheres. Environmental Entomology, 
16(3): 639-644. 

Owensby, C.E., J.M. Ham, A.K. Knapp, and L.M. Auen, 1999. 
Biomass production and species composition change in a tallgrass 
prairie ecosystem after long-term exposure to elevated atmospheric 
CO2. Global Change Biology, 5(5): 497-506. 

Pangga, I.B., J. Hanan, and S. Chakraborty, 2011. Pathogen dynamics 
in a crop canopy and their evolution under changing climate. Plant 
Pathology, 60(1): 70-81. 

Parmesan, C., 2006. Ecological and evolutionary responses to recent 
climate change. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 
37(1): 637-669. 

Parmesan, C., and G. Yohe, 2003. A globally coherent fingerprint of 
climate change impacts across natural systems. Nature, 421(6918): 
37-42. 

Parton, W.J., J.A. Morgan, G. Wang, and S. Del Grosso, 2007. Projected 
ecosystem impact of the prairie heating and CO2 enrichment 
experiment. New Phytologist, 174(4): 823-834. 

Patterson, D.T., E.P. Flint, and J.L. Beyers, 1984. Effects of CO2 
enrichment on competition between a C4 weed and a C3 crop. 
Weed Science, 32(1): 101-105. 

Patterson, D.T., J.K. Westbrook, R.J.V. Joyce, P.D. Lingren, and J. 
Rogasik, 1999. Weeds, insects, and diseases. Climatic Change, 
43(4): 711-727. 

Polley, H.W., H.B. Johnson, and J.D. Derner, 2003. Increasing CO2 
from subambient to superambient concentrations alters species 
composition and increases above-ground biomass in a C3/C4 
grassland. New Phytologist, 160(2): 319-327. 

Poorter, H., and M.-L. Navas, 2003. Plant growth and competition 
at elevated CO2: On winners, losers and functional groups. New 
Phytologist, 157(2): 175-198. 

Appendix A 


Porter, J.H., M.L. Parry, and T.R. Carter, 1991. The potential effects 
of climatic change on agricultural insect pests. Agricultural and 
Forest Meteorology, 57(13): 221-240. 

Potvin, C., and L. Vasseur, 1997. Long-term CO2 enrichment of a 
pasture community: Species richness, dominance, and succession. 
Ecology, 78(3): 666-677. 

Pujol Pereira, E.I., H. Chung, K. Scow, M.J. Sadowsky, C. van Kessel, 
and J. Six, 2011. Soil nitrogen transformations under elevated 
atmospheric CO2 and O3 during the soybean growing season. 
Environmental Pollution, 159(2): 401-407. 

Rahman, A., and D. Wardle, 1990. Effects of climate change on cropping 
weeds in New Zealand, in R.A. Prestidge and R.P. Pottinger 
(eds.), The impact of climate change on pests, diseases, weeds 
and beneficial organisms present in New Zealand agricultural and 
horticultural systems. Ruakura Agricultural Centre, Hamilton. 

Roos, J., R. Hopkins, A. Kvarnheden, and C. Dixelius, 2011. The 
impact of global warming on plant diseases and insect vectors in 
Sweden. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 129(1): 9-19. 

Sacks, W.J., and C.J. Kucharik, 2011. Crop management and phenology 
trends in the U.S. corn belt: Impacts on yields, evapotranspiration 
and energy balance. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 
151(7): 882-894. 

Salt, D.T., G.L. Brooks, and J.B. Whittaker, 1995. Elevated carbon 
dioxide affects leaf-miner performance and plant growth in docks 
(rumex spp.). Global Change Biology, 1(2): 153-156. 

Samuel, G., 1931. Some experiments on inoculating methods with 
plant viruses, and on local lesions. Annals of Applied Biology, 
18(4): 494-507. 

Savary, S., A. Nelson, A.H. Sparks, L. Willocquet, E. Duveiller, G. 
Mahuku, G. Forbes, K.A. Garrett, D. Hodson, J. Padgham, S. 
Pande, M. Sharma, J. Yuen, and A. Djurle, 2011. International 
agricultural research tackling the effects of global and climate 
changes on plant diseases in the developing world. Plant Disease, 
95(10): 1204-1216. 

Schlenker, W., and M.J. Roberts, 2009. Nonlinear temperature effects 
indicate severe damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 
15594-15598. 

Shaw, M.W., and T.M. Osborne, 2011. Geographic distribution of plant 
pathogens in response to climate change. Plant Pathology, 60(1): 
31-43. 

Smith, P.H.D., and T.H. Jones, 1998. Effects of elevated CO2 on the 
chrysanthemum leaf-miner, Chromatomyia syngenesiae: A greenhouse 
study. Global Change Biology, 4(3): 287-291. 

Smith, S.D., T.E. Huxman, S.F. Zitzer, T.N. Charlet, D.C. Housman, 
J.S. Coleman, L.K. Fenstermaker, J.R. Seemann, and R.S. Nowak, 
2000. Elevated CO2 increases productivity and invasive species 
success in an arid ecosystem. Nature, 408(6808): 79-82. 

Song, L., J. Wu, C. Li, F. Li, S. Peng, and B. Chen, 2009. Different 
responses of invasive and native species to elevated CO2 concentration. 
Acta Oecologica, 35(1): 128-135. 

Srygley, R.B., R. Dudley, E.G. Oliveira, R. Aizpra, N.Z. Pelaez, and 
A.J. Riveros, 2010. El Nio and dry season rainfall influence hostplant 
phenology and an annual butterfly migration from neotropical 
wet to dry forests. Global Change Biology, 16(3): 936-945. 

Stephens, A.E.A., D.J. Kriticos, and A. Leriche, 2007. The current and 
future potential geographical distribution of the oriental fruit fly, 
Bactrocera dorsalis (diptera: Tephritidae). Bulletin of Entomological 
Research, 97(04): 369-378. 

Stiling, P., and T. Cornelissen, 2007. How does elevated carbon dioxide 
(CO2) affect plantherbivore interactions? A field experiment and 
meta-analysis of CO2-mediated changes on plant chemistry and 
herbivore performance. Global Change Biology, 13(9): 1823-1842. 

Sun, Y.-C., J. Yin, F.-J. Chen, G. Wu, and F. Ge, 2011. How does atmospheric 
elevated CO2 affect crop pests and their natural enemies? 
Case histories from China. Insect Science, 18(4): 393-400. 

Thomsen, M.A., and C.M. DAntonio, 2007. Mechanisms of resistance 
to invasion in a California grassland: The roles of competitor 
identity, resource availability, and environmental gradients. Oikos, 
116(1): 17-30. 

Thornton, P.K., J. van de Steeg, A. Notenbaert, and M. Herrero, 2009. 
The impacts of climate change on livestock and livestock systems 
in developing countries: A review of what we know and what we 
need to know. Agricultural Systems, 101(3): 113-127. 

Thresh, J., 1983. Plant virus epidemiology and control: Current trends 
and future prospects, in R.T. Plumb and J.M. Thresh (eds.), Plant 
virus epidemiology : The spread and control of insect-borne 
viruses, pp. 349-360. Blackwell Scientific Publications ; Blackwell 
Mosby Book Distributors, Oxford; Boston; St. Louis, Mo. 

Tobin, P.C., S. Nagarkatti, G. Loeb, and M.C. Saunders, 2008. Historical 
and projected interactions between climate change and insect 
voltinism in a multivoltine species. Global Change Biology, 14(5): 
951-957. 

Trnka, M., F. Mu.ka, D. Semerdov, M. Dubrovsk., E. Kocmnkov, 
and Z. .alud, 2007. European corn borer life stage model: 
Regional estimates of pest development and spatial distribution 
under present and future climate. Ecological Modelling, 207(24): 
61-84. 

Tu, C., F.L. Booker, K.O. Burkey, and S. Hu, 2009. Elevated atmospheric 
carbon dioxide and O3 differentially alter nitrogen acquisition 
in peanut. Crop Science, 49(5): 1827-1836. 

Tubiello, F.N., J.S. Amthor, K.J. Boote, M. Donatelli, W. Easterling, 
G. Fischer, R.M. Gifford, M. Howden, J. Reilly, and C. Rosenzweig, 
2007. Crop response to elevated CO2 and world food 
supply: A comment on food for thought by Long et al. Science 
312:19181921, 2006. European Journal of Agronomy, 26(3): 
215-223. 

Tylianakis, J.M., R.K. Didham, J. Bascompte, and D.A. Wardle, 2008. 
Global change and species interactions in terrestrial ecosystems. 
Ecology Letters, 11(12): 1351-1363. 

Uauy, C., J. Brevis, X. Chen, I. Khan, L. Jackson, O. Chicaiza, A. 
Distelfeld, T. Fahima, and J. Dubcovsky, 2005. High-temperature 
adult-plant (htap) stripe rust resistance gene Yr36 from Triticum 
turgidum ssp. Dicoccoides is closely linked to the grain protein 
content locus Gpc-B1. TAG Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
112(1): 97-105. 

Van der Putten, W.H., M. Macel, and M.E. Visser, 2010. Predicting 
species distribution and abundance responses to climate change: 
Why it is essential to include biotic interactions across trophic 
levels. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 365(1549): 2025-2034. 

Walther, G.-R., 2010. Community and ecosystem responses to recent 
climate change. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 365(1549): 2019-2024. 

Walther, G.-R., E. Post, P. Convey, A. Menzel, C. Parmesan, T.J.C. 
Beebee, J.-M. Fromentin, O. Hoegh-Guldberg, and F. Bairlein, 
2002. Ecological responses to recent climate change. Nature, 
416(6879): 389-395. 

Wand, S.J.E., G.F. Midgley, M.H. Jones, and P.S. Curtis, 1999. 
Responses of wild C4 and C3 grass (poaceae) species to elevated 
atmospheric CO2 concentration: A meta-analytic test of current 
theories and perceptions. Global Change Biology, 5(6): 723-741. 

Wang, Y., Z. Bao, Y. Zhu, and J. Hua, 2009. Analysis of temperature 
modulation of plant defense against biotrophic microbes. Molecular 
Plant-Microbe Interactions, 22(5): 498-506. 

Webb, K.M., I. Oa, J. Bai, K.A. Garrett, T. Mew, C.M. Vera Cruz, 
and J.E. Leach, 2010. A benefit of high temperature: Increased 
effectiveness of a rice bacterial blight disease resistance gene. New 
Phytologist, 185(2): 568-576. 

Appendix A 


Welch, J.R., J.R. Vincent, M. Auffhammer, P.F. Moya, A. Dobermann, 
and D. Dawe, 2010. Rice yields in tropical/subtropical Asia 
exhibit large but opposing sensitivities to minimum and maximum 
temperatures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
107(33): 14562-14567. 

White, T.C.R., 1984. The abundance of invertebrate herbivores in 
relation to the availability of nitrogen in stressed food plants. 
Oecologia, 63(1): 90-105. 

Whitham, S., S. McCormick, and B. Baker, 1996. The N gene of 
tobacco confers resistance to tobacco mosaic virus in transgenic 
tomato. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(16): 
8776-8781. 

Williams, A.L., K.E. Wills, J.K. Janes, J.K. Vander Schoor, P.C.D. 
Newton, and M.J. Hovenden, 2007. Warming and free-air CO2 
enrichment alter demographics in four co-occurring grassland species. 
New Phytologist, 176(2): 365-374. 

Wilson, K.B., T.N. Carlson, and J.A. Bunce, 1999. Feedback 
significantly influences the simulated effect of CO2 on seasonal 
evapotranspiration from two agricultural species. Global Change 
Biology, 5(8): 903-917. 

Wittmann, E.J., and M. Baylis, 2000. Climate change: Effects on 
culicoides -transmitted viruses and implications for the UK. The 
Veterinary Journal, 160(2): 107-117. 

Woodward, F.I., 1988. Temperature and the distribution of plant species, 
in S.P. Long and F.I. Woodward (eds.), Plants and temperature. 
Published for the Society for Experimental Biology by the 
Company of Biologists. University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 

Woodward, F.I., and B.G. Williams, 1987. Climate and plant distribution 
at global and local scales. Plant Ecology, 69(1): 189-197. 

Wu, G., F.J. Chen, and F. Ge, 2006. Response of multiple generations 
of cotton bollworm Helicoverpa armigera Hbner, feeding on 
spring wheat, to elevated CO2. Journal of Applied Entomology, 
130(1): 2-9. 

Zavala, J.A., C.L. Casteel, E.H. DeLucia, and M.R. Berenbaum, 2008. 
Anthropogenic increase in carbon dioxide compromises plant 
defense against invasive insects. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 105(13): 5129-5133. 

Ziska, L.H., 2000. The impact of elevated CO2 on yield loss from a 
C3 and C4 weed in field-grown soybean. Global Change Biology, 
6(8): 899-905. 

Ziska, L.H., 2001. Changes in competitive ability between a C4 crop 
and a C3 weed with elevated carbon dioxide. Weed Science, 49(5): 
622-627. 

Ziska, L.H., 2003. Evaluation of the growth response of six invasive 
species to past, present and future atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 54(381): 395-404. 

Ziska, L.H., 2003. Evaluation of yield loss in field sorghum from a C3 
and C4 weed with increasing CO2. Weed Science, 51(6): 914-918. 

Ziska, L.H., and J.A. Bunce, 1998. The influence of increasing growth 
temperature and CO2 concentration on the ratio of respiration to 
photosynthesis in soybean seedlings. Global Change Biology, 4(6): 
637-643. 

Ziska, L.H., and J.A. Bunce, 2007. Predicting the impact of changing 
CO2 on crop yields: Some thoughts on food. New Phytologist, 
175(4): 607-618. 

Ziska, L.H., S. Faulkner, and J. Lydon, 2004. Changes in biomass and 
root:shoot ratio of field-grown Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), 
a noxious, invasive weed, with elevated CO2: Implications for 
control with glyphosate. Weed Science, 52(4): 584-588. 

Ziska, L.H., J.B. Reeves, and B. Blank, 2005. The impact of recent 
increases in atmospheric CO2 on biomass production and vegetative 
retention of cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum): Implications for 
fire disturbance. Global Change Biology, 11(8): 1325-1332. 

Ziska, L.H., and J.R. Teasdale, 2000. Sustained growth and increased 
tolerance to glyphosate observed in a C3, quackgrass (Elytrigia 
repens), grown at elevated carbon dioxide. Functional Plant Biology, 
27(2): 159-166. 

Ziska, L.H., J.R. Teasdale, and J.A. Bunce, 1999. Future atmospheric 
carbon dioxide concentrations may increase tolerance to glyphosate. 
Weed Science, 47(608-615). 

Chapter 5 References 

Adam, N.R., G.W. Wall, B.A. Kimball, S.B. Idso, and A.N. Webber, 
2004. Photosynthetic down-regulation over long-term CO2 
enrichment in leaves of sour orange (Citrus aurantium) trees. New 
Phytologist, 163(2): 341-347. 

Adams, R.M., B.A. McCarl, K. Segerson, C. Rosenzweig, K.J. Bryant, 
B.L. Dixon, R. Connor, R.E. Evenson, and D. Ojima, 1999. The 
economic effects of climate change on U.S. Agriculture, in R.O. 
Mendelsohn and J.E. Neumann (eds.), The impact of climate 
change on the United States economy, pp. 19-54. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge; New York. 

Adams, R.M., and D.E. Peck, 2008. Effects of climate change on 
drought frequency: Impacts and mitigation opportunities, in A. 
Garrido and A. Dinar (eds.), Managing water resources in a time 
of global change: Mountains, valleys and flood plains. Routledge, 
London; New York. 

Ahmadi, E., H.R. Ghassemzadeh, M. Sadeghi, M. Moghaddam, and 
S.Z. Neshat, 2010. The effect of impact and fruit properties on the 
bruising of peach. Journal of Food Engineering, 97(1): 110-117. 

Ainsworth, E.A., and S.P. Long, 2005. What have we learned from 15 
years of free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE)? A meta-analytic review 
of the responses of photosynthesis, canopy properties and plant 
production to rising CO2. New Phytologist, 165(2): 351-372. 

Ainsworth, E.A., A. Rogers, L.O. Vodkin, A. Walter, and U. Schurr, 
2006. The effects of elevated CO2 concentration on soybean gene 
expression. An analysis of growing and mature leaves. Plant 
Physiology, 142(1): 135-147. 

Akin, D.E., S.L. Fales, L.L. Rigsby, and M.E. Snook, 1987. Temperature 
effects on leaf anatomy, phenolic acids, and tissue digestibility 
in tall fescue. Agronomy Journal, 79(2): 271-275. 

Alagarswamy, G., and J.T. Ritchie, 1991. Phasic development in ceressorghum 
model, in T. Hodges (ed.) Predicting crop phenology, pp. 
143-152. CRC Press, Boca Raton. 

Alberto, A., L. Ziska, C. Cervancia, and P. Manalo, 1996. The influence 
of increasing carbon dioxide and temperature on competitive 
interactions between a C3 crop, rice (Oryza sativa) and a C4 weed 
(Echinochloa glabrescens). Functional Plant Biology, 23(6): 
795-802. 

Allen, L.H., and J.C.V. Vu, 2009. Carbon dioxide and high temperature 
effects on growth of young orange trees in a humid, subtropical 
environment. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 149(5): 
820-830. 

Allen, R.D., and L. Aleman, 2011. Abiotic stress and cotton fiber 
development, in D.M. Oosterhuis (ed.) Stress physiology in cotton. 
The Cotton Foundation, Cordova, TN. 

Alocilja, E.C., and J.T. Ritchie, 1991. A model for the phenology of 
rice, in T. Hodges (ed.) Predicting crop phenology, pp. 181-189. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton. 

Amadi, C.O.E.-O., E. E.; Okonkwo, J. C.; Okocha, P. I., , 2009. Interrelationships 
between yield and yield attributes of potato grown 
under supra-optimal ambient temperatures. Global Journal of Pure 
and Applied Sciences, 15: 5-14. 

Amundson, J.L., T.L. Mader, R.J. Rasby, and Q.S. Hu, 2006. Environmental 
effects on pregnancy rate in beef cattle. Journal of Animal 
Science, 84(12): 3415-3420. 

Appendix A 


Anderson, L.J., H. Maherali, H.B. Johnson, H.W. Polley, and R.B. 
Jackson, 2001. Gas exchange and photosynthetic acclimation over 
subambient to elevated CO2 in a C3C4 grassland. Global Change 
Biology, 7(6): 693-707. 

Arevalo, L.S., D.M. Oosterhuis, D. Coker, and R.S. Brown, 2008. 
Physiological response of cotton to high night temperature. Amer. 
J. Plant Sci. And Biotechnol, 2: 63-68. 

Arias, R.A., T.L. Mader, and A.M. Parkhurst, 2011. Effects of diet type 
and metabolizable energy intake on tympanic temperature of steers 
fed during summer and winter seasons. Journal of Animal Science, 
89(5): 1574-1580. 

Arndt, C.H., 1945. Temperature-growth relations of the roots and 
hypocotyls of cotton seedlings. Plant Physiology, 20(2): 200-220. 

Arnone, J.A., R.L. Jasoni, A.J. Lucchesi, J.D. Larsen, E.A. Leger, R.A. 
Sherry, Y. Luo, D.S. Schimel, and P.S.J. Verburg, 2011. A climatically 
extreme year has large impacts on C4 species in tallgrass 
prairie ecosystems but only minor effects on species richness and 
other plant functional groups. Journal of Ecology, 99(3): 678-688. 

ASWCC, 1997. Ground water protection and management report for 
1996. Arkansas Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 

Atkinson, C.J., J.M. Taylor, D. Wilkins, and R.T. Besford, 1997. 
Effects of elevated CO2 on chloroplast components, gas exchange 
and growth of oak and cherry. Tree Physiology, 17(5): 319-325. 

Badu-Apraku, B., R.B. Hunter, and M. Tollenaar, 1983. Effect of 
temperature during grain filling on whole plant and grain yield in 
maize (Zea mays l.). Canadian Journal of Plant Science, 63(2): 
357-363. 

Baker, J.T., and L.H. Allen Jr, 1993. Contrasting crop species responses 
to CO2 and temperature: Rice, soybean and citrus. Vegetatio, 104- 
105: 239-260. 

Baker, J.T., L.H. Allen Jr, and K.J. Boote, 1992. Response of rice to 
carbon dioxide and temperature. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 
60(34): 153-166. 

Baker, J.T., K.J. Boote, and J. L.H. Allen, 1995. Potential climate 
change effects on rice: Carbon dioxide and temperature, in C. 
Rosenzweig et al. (ed.) Climate change and agriculture: Analysis 
of potential international impacts. ASA spec. Pub. No. 59. ASACSSA-
SSSA, Madison, WI. 

Bale, J.S., G.J. Masters, I.D. Hodkinson, C. Awmack, T.M. Bezemer, 
V.K. Brown, J. Butterfield, A. Buse, J.C. Coulson, J. Farrar, J.E.G. 
Good, R. Harrington, S. Hartley, T.H. Jones, R.L. Lindroth, M.C. 
Press, I. Symrnioudis, A.D. Watt, and J.B. Whittaker, 2002. Herbivory 
in global climate change research: Direct effects of rising 
temperature on insect herbivores. Global Change Biology, 8(1): 
1-16. 

Ball, R.A., D.M. Oosterhuis, and A. Mauromoustakos, 1994. Growth 
dynamics of the cotton plant during water-deficit stress. Agronomy 
Journal, 86(5): 788-795. 

Bange, M.P., S.P. Milroy, and P. Thongbai, 2004. Growth and yield of 
cotton in response to waterlogging. Field Crops Research, 88(23): 
129-142. 

Barber, H.N., and P.J.H. Sharpe, 1971. Genetics and physiology of 
sunscald of fruits. Agricultural Meteorology, 8(0): 175-191. 

Barrow, J.R., 1983. Comparisons among pollen viability measurement 
methods in cotton. Crop Science, 23(4): 734-736. 

Bartomeus, I., J.S. Ascher, D. Wagner, B.N. Danforth, S. Colla, S. 
Kornbluth, and R. Winfree, 2011. Climate-associated phenological 
advances in bee pollinators and bee-pollinated plants. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(51): 20645-20649. 

Bates, J.D., T. Svejcar, R.F. Miller, and R.A. Angell, 2006. The effects 
of precipitation timing on sagebrush steppe vegetation. Journal of 
Arid Environments, 64(4): 670-697. 

Bauer, G.A., G.M. Berntson, and F.A. Bazzaz, 2001. Regenerating 
temperate forests under elevated CO2 and nitrogen deposition: 
Comparing biochemical and stomatal limitation of photosynthesis. 
New Phytologist, 152(2): 249-266. 

Baylis, M., and A.K. Githeko, 2006. T7.3: The effects of climate 
change on infectious diseases of animals. Foresight http://www. 
bis.gov.uk/foresight/our-work/projects/published-projects/ 
infectious-diseases/reports-and-publications. 

Beede, D.K., and R.J. Collier, 1986. Potential nutritional strategies 
for intensively managed cattle during thermal stress. Journal of 
Animal Science, 62(2): 543-554. 

Bender, J., U. Hertstein, and C.R. Black, 1999. Growth and yield 
responses of spring wheat to increasing carbon dioxide, ozone and 
physiological stresses: A statistical analysis of ESPACE-wheat 
results. European Journal of Agronomy, 10(34): 185-195. 

Bennett, O.L., L.J. Erie, and A.J. MacKenzie, 1967. Boll, fiber, and 
spinning properties of cotton as affected by management practices. 
USDA Technical Bulletin No. 1372, Washington, DC. 

Beppu, K., T. Ikeda, and I. Kataoka, 2001. Effect of high temperature 
exposure time during flower bud formation on the occurrence of 
double pistils in satohnishiki sweet cherry. Scientia Horticulturae, 
87(1-2): 77-84. 

Beppu, K., S. Okamoto, A. Sugiyama, and I. Kataoka, 1997. Effects of 
temperature on flower development and fruit set of satohnishiki 
sweet cherry. Journal of the Japanese Society for Horticultural 
Science, 65(4): 707-712. 

Bernacchi, C.J., A.D.B. Leakey, L.E. Heady, P.B. Morgan, F.G. Dohleman, 
J.M. McGrath, K.M. Gillespie, V.E. Wittig, A. Rogers, S.P. 
Long, and D.R. Ort, 2006. Hourly and seasonal variation in photosynthesis 
and stomatal conductance of soybean grown at future 
CO2 and ozone concentrations for 3 years under fully open-air field 
conditions. Plant, Cell & Environment, 29(11): 2077-2090. 

Berry, J.K., J.A. Delgado, R. Khosla, and F.J. Pierce, 2003. Precision 
conservation for environmental sustainability. Journal of Soil and 
Water Conservation, 58(6): 332+. 

Bibi, A.C., D.M. Oosterhuis, and E.D. Gonias, and J.M. Stewart, 2010. 
Comparison of a responses of a ruderal Gossypium hirsutum l. 
With commercial cotton genotypes under high temperature stress. 
Amer. J. Plant Sci. Biotechnol, 4: 87-92. 

Bibi, A.C., D.M. Oosterhuis, and E.G. Gonias, 2008. Photosynthesis, 
quantum yield of photosystem II, and membrane leakage as 
affected by high temperatures in cotton genotypes. Journal of 
Cotton Science, 12: 150-159. 

Bindi, M., L. Fibbi, and F. Miglietta, 2001. Free air CO2 enrichment 
(FACE) of grapevine (Vitis vinifera l.): II. Growth and quality of 
grape and wine in response to elevated CO2 concentrations. European 
Journal of Agronomy, 14(2): 145-155. 

Bisognin, D.A., D.R. Muller, N.A. Streck, J.L. Andriolo, and D. 
Sausen, 2008. Development and yield of potato clones during 
spring and autumn. Pesquisa Agropecuria Brasileira, 43(6): 
699-705. 

Biswas, D.K., H. Xu, Y.G. Li, J.Z. Sun, X.Z. Wang, X.G. Han, and 
G.M. Jiang, 2008. Genotypic differences in leaf biochemical, 
physiological and growth responses to ozone in 20 winter wheat 
cultivars released over the past 60 years. Global Change Biology, 
14(1): 46-59. 

Bolhuis, C.G., and W. deGroot, 1959. Observations on the effect of 
varying temperature on the flowering and fruit set in three varieties 
of groundnut. Neth. J. Agric. Sci, 7: 317-326. 

Boote, K.J., L.H. Allen, P.V.V. Prasad, J.T. Baker, R.W. Gesch, A.M. 
Snyder, D. Pan, and J.M.G. Thomas, 2005. Elevated temperature 
and CO2 impacts on pollination, reproductive growth, and yield of 
several globally important crops. J. Agric. Meteorol, 60: 469-474. 

Appendix A 


Boote, K.J., J.W. Jones, and G. Hoogenboom, 1998. Simulation of 
crop growth: CROPGRO model, in R. Peart and R.B. Curry (eds.), 
Agricultural systems modeling and simulation, pp. 651-692. 
Marcel Dekker, New York. 

Boote, K.J., N.B. Pickering, and L.H.A. Jr., 1997. Plant modeling: 
Advances and gaps in our capability to project future crop growth 
and yield in response to global climate change, in L. H. Allen et 
al. (ed.) Advances in carbon dioxide effects research. ASA Special 
Publication No. 61. ASA-CSSA-SSSA, Madison, WI. 

Bordonaba, G.J., and L.A. Terry, 2010. Manipulating the taste-related 
composition of strawberry fruits (Fragaria ananassa) from different 
cultivars using deficit irrigation. Food Chemistry, 122(4): 
1020-1026. 

Bordovsky, J.P., W.M. Lyle, R.J. Lascano, and D.R. Upchurch, 1992. 
Cotton irrigation management with LEPA systems. Transactions of 
the American Society of Agricultural Engineering, 35: 879-884. 

Bouman, B.A.M., R.M. Lampayan, and T.P. Tuong, 2007. Water management 
in irrigated rice : Coping with water scarcity. International 
Rice Research Institute, Manila, The Philippines. 

Bradow, J.M., and G.H. Davidonis, 2000. Quantitation of fiber quality 
and the cotton production-processing interface: A physiologists 
perspective. Journal of Cotton Science, 4(34-64). 

Brakke, M., and L.H. Allen, 1995. Gas-exchange of citrus seedlings 
at different temperatures, vapor-pressure deficits, and soil-water 
contents. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science, 
120(3): 497-504. 

Brown, P.W., and C.A. Zeiher, 1998. A model to estimate cotton 
canopy temperature in the desert southwest, paper presented at 
Proceedings of the Beltwide Cotton Conferences. National Cotton 
Council of America, Memphis, TN. 

Brown, S., and D.M. Oosterhuis, 2010. High daytime temperature 
stress effects on the physiology of modern versus obsolete cultivars. 
Amer. J. Plant Sci. Biotechnol, 4: 93-96. 

Bruce, R.R., and C.D. Shipp, 1962. Cotton fruiting as affected by soil 
moisture regime. Agronomy Journal, 54(1): 15-18. 

Bruns, H.A., and H.K. Abbas, 2006. Planting date effects on Bt and 
non-Bt corn in the mid-south USA. Agronomy Journal, 98(1): 
100-106. 

Buban, T., 2000. The use of benzyladenine in orchard fruit growing: A 
mini review. Plant Growth Regulation, 32(2-3): 381-390. 

Bunce, J.A., 1992. Stomatal conductance, photosynthesis and respiration 
of temperate deciduous tree seedlings grown outdoors at an 
elevated concentration of carbon-dioxide. Plant Cell and Environment, 
15(5): 541-549. 

Burke, J.J., J.R. Mahan, and J.L. Hatfield, 1988. Crop-specific thermal 
kinetic windows in relation to wheat and cotton biomass production. 
Agronomy Journal, 80(4): 553-556. 

Burke, J.J., and D.F. Wanjura, 2009. Plant responses to temperature 
extremes, in J.M. Stewart, D.M. Oosterhuis, J.J. Heitholt and J.R. 
Mauney (eds.), Physiology of cotton, pp. 123-128. Springer, New 
York. 

Bustan, A., E.E. Goldschmidt, and Y. Erner, 1996. Integrating temperature 
effects on fruit growth into a citrus productivity model 
paper presented at International Citrus Congress (8th : 1996: Sun 
City, South Africa), Sun City, South Africa, International Society 
of Citriculture. 

Camejo, D., P. Rodrguez, M. Angeles Morales, J. Miguel DellAmico, 
A. Torrecillas, and J.J. Alarcn, 2005. High temperature effects on 
photosynthetic activity of two tomato cultivars with different heat 
susceptibility. Journal of Plant Physiology, 162(3): 281-289. 

Caprio, J.M., and H.A. Quamme, 2002. Weather conditions associated 
with grape production in the Okanagan valley of British Columbia 
and potential impact of climate change. Canadian Journal of Plant 
Science, 82(4): 755-763. 

Casierra-Posada, F.V., Y. A., 2007. Growth and yield of strawberry 
cultivars (Fragaria sp.) affected by flooding. Revista Colombiana 
de Ciencias Horticolas, 1: 21-32. 

Centritto, M., 2002. The effects of elevated CO2 and water availability 
on growth and physiology of peach (Prunus persica) plants. Plant 
Biosystems, 136(2): 177-188. 

Centritto, M., 2005. Photosynthetic limitations and carbon partitioning 
in cherry in response to water deficit and elevated CO2. Agriculture 
Ecosystems & Environment, 106(2-3): 233-242. 

Centritto, M., H.S.J. Lee, and P.G. Jarvis, 1999. Increased growth in 
elevated CO2: An early, short-term response? Global Change Biology, 
5(6): 623-633. 

Centritto, M., M.E. Lucas, and P.G. Jarvis, 2002. Gas exchange, biomass, 
whole-plant water-use efficiency and water uptake of peach 
(Prunus persica) seedlings in response to elevated carbon dioxide 
concentration and water availability. Tree Physiology, 22(10): 
699-706. 

Centritto, M., F. Magnani, H.S.J. Lee, and P.G. Jarvis, 1999. Interactive 
effects of elevated CO2 and drought on cherry (Prunus avium) 
seedlings - II. Photosynthetic capacity and water relations. New 
Phytologist, 141(1): 141-153. 

Charlier, T., 2002. Rice soaks up water along with tax dollars. The 
Commercial Appeal, 06 October 2002. 

Chen, K., G.Q. Hu, and F. Lenz, 2001. Effects of doubled atmospheric 
CO2 concentration on apple trees I. Growth analysis. Gartenbauwissenschaft, 
66(6): 282-288. 

Chen, K., G.Q. Hu, and F. Lenz, 2002. Effects of doubled atmospheric 
CO2 concentration on apple trees II. Dry mass production. Gartenbauwissenschaft, 
67(1): 28-33. 

Chen, L.S., P. Li, and L. Cheng, 2008. Effects of high temperature 
coupled with high light on the balance between photooxidation and 
photoprotection in the sun-exposed peel of apple. Planta, 228(5): 
745-756. 

Cheng, L., F.L. Booker, K.O. Burkey, C. Tu, H.D. Shew, T.W. Rufty, 
E.L. Fiscus, J.L. Deforest, and S. Hu, 2011. Soil microbial 
responses to elevated CO2 and O3 in a nitrogen-aggrading agroecosystem. 
PLoS ONE, 6(6): e21377. 

Chepil, W.S., and N.P. Woodruff, 1954. Estimations of wind erodibility 
of field surfaces. J. Soil and Water Conserv, 9: 257-265, 285. 

Chowdhury, S., and I. Wardlaw, 1978. The effect of temperature on 
kernel development in cereals. Australian Journal of Agricultural 
Research, 29(2): 205-223. 

Cleland, E.E., N.R. Chiariello, S.R. Loarie, H.A. Mooney, and C.B. 
Field, 2006. Diverse responses of phenology to global changes in 
a grassland ecosystem. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 103(37): 13740-13744. 

Coakley, S.M., H. Scherm, and S. Chakraborty, 1999. Climate change 
and plant disease management. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 
37: 399-426. 

Cole, P., and P. McCloud, 1985. Salinity and climatic effects on the 
yields of citrus. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture, 
25(3): 711-717. 

Collaku, A., and S.A. Harrison, 2002. Losses in wheat due to waterlogging. 
Crop Sci., 42(2): 444-450. 

Conaty, W.C., D.K.Y. Tan, G.A. Constable, B.G. Sutton, D.J. Field, 
and E.A. Mamum, 2008. Genetic variation for waterlogging tolerance 
in cotton. Journal of Cotton Science, 12: 53-61. 

Constable, G., and H. Rawson, 1980. Effect of leaf position, expansion 
and age on photosynthesis, transpiration and water use efficiency 
of cotton. Functional Plant Biology, 7(1): 89-100. 

Cooper, N.T.W., T.J. Siebenmorgen, and P.A. Counce, 2008. Effects of 
nighttime temperature during kernel development on rice physicochemical 
properties. Cereal Chemistry Journal, 85(3): 276-282. 

Appendix A 


Cottee, N.S., D.K.Y. Tan, J.T. Cothren, M.P. Bange, and L.C. Campbell, 
2007. Screening cotton cultivars for thermotolerance under 
field conditions, paper presented at Proceedings of the 4th World 
Cotton Research Conference. Lubbock, TX, USA, September, 
2007. 

Craine, J.M., A.J. Elmore, K.C. Olson, and D. Tolleson, 2010. Climate 
change and cattle nutritional stress. Global Change Biology, 
16(10): 2901-2911. 

Crisosto, C.H., D. Garner, J. Doyle, and K.R. Day, 1993. Relationship 
between fruit respiration, bruising susceptibility, and temperature 
in sweet cherries. HortScience, 28(2): 132-135. 

Cruse, R.M., and C.G. Herndl, 2009. Balancing corn stover harvest 
for biofuels with soil and water conservation. Journal of Soil and 
Water Conservation, 64(4): 286-291. 

Curtis, P.S., and X.Z. Wang, 1998. A meta-analysis of elevated CO2 
effects on woody plant mass, form, and physiology. Oecologia, 
113(3): 299-313. 

Dale, A. 2008. Raspberry production in greenhouses: physiological 
aspects. Acta Hort. 777:219-224. 

Danka, R.G., and L.D. Beaman, 2007. Flight activity of USDA-ARS 
Russian honey bees (hymenoptera : Apidae) during pollination of 
lowbush blueberries in maine. Journal of Economic Entomology, 
100(2): 267-272. 

Darnell, R.L., and J.G. Williamson, 1997. Feasibility of blueberry 
production in warm climates. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 446(251-256). 

Davis, M.S., T.L. Mader, S.M. Holt, and A.M. Parkhurst, 2003. 
Strategies to reduce feedlot cattle heat stress: Effects on tympanic 
temperature. Journal of Animal Science, 81(3): 649-661. 

De Boeck, H.J., C.M.H.M. Lemmens, C. Zavalloni, B. Gielen, S. 
Malchair, M. Carnol, R. Merckx, J. Van den Berge, R. Ceulemans, 
and I. Nijs, 2008. Biomass production in experimental grasslands 
of different species richness during three years of climate warming. 
Biogeosciences, 5(2): 585-594. 

de Orduna, R.M., 2010. Climate change associated effects on grape 
and wine quality and production. Food Research International, 
43(7): 1844-1855. 

de Steiguer, J.E., 2008. Semi-arid rangelands and carbon offset markets: 
A look at the economic prospects. Rangelands, 30(2): 27-32. 

DeBach, P., and S. R.A., 1963. Competitive displacement between 
ecological homologues. Hilgardia, 34: 105-166. 

Debinski, D.M., H. Wickham, K. Kindscher, J.C. Caruthers, and M. 
Germino, 2010. Montane meadow change during drought varies 
with background hydrologic regime and plant functional group. 
Ecology, 91(6): 1672-1681. 

Delgado, J.A., P.M. Groffman, M.A. Nearing, T. Goddard, D. 
Reicosky, R. Lal, N.R. Kitchen, C.W. Rice, D. Towery, and P. 
Salon, 2011. Conservation practices to mitigate and adapt to 
climate change. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 66(4): 
118A-129A. 

Delgado, J.A., and A.R. Mosier, 1996. Mitigation alternatives to 
decrease nitrous oxides emissions and urea-nitrogen loss and their 
effect on methane flux. Journal of Environmental Quality, 25(5): 
1105-1111. 

DeLucia, E.H., and R.B. Thomas, 2000. Photosynthetic responses to 
CO2 enrichment of four hardwood species in a forest understory. 
Oecologia, 122(1): 11-19. 

Derner, J.D., K.R. Hickman, and H.W. Polley, 2011. Decreasing precipitation 
variability does not elicit major aboveground biomass or 
plant diversity responses in a mesic rangeland. Rangeland Ecology 
& Management, 64(4): 352-357. 

Derner, J.D., H.B. Johnson, B.A. Kimball, P.J. Pinter, H.W. Polley, 
C.R. Tischler, T.W. Boutton, R.L. Lamorte, G.W. Wall, N.R. Adam, 
S.W. Leavitt, M.J. Ottman, A.D. Matthias, and T.J. Brooks, 2003. 
Above- and below-ground responses of C3 C4 species mixtures 
to elevated CO2 and soil water availability. Global Change Biology, 
9(3): 452-460. 

Dettinger, M.D., and S. Earman, 2007. Western ground water and 
climate change - pivotal to supply sustainability or vulnerable in its 
own right? Ground Water News and Views, Association of Ground 
Water Scientists and Engineers Newsletter, 4(1): 4-5. 

Dhillon, T., S.P. Pearce, E.J. Stockinger, A. Distelfeld, C. Li, A.K. 
Knox, I. Vashegyi, A. Vgjfalvi, G. Galiba, and J. Dubcovsky, 
2010. Regulation of freezing tolerance and flowering in temperate 
cereals: The VRN-1 connection. Plant Physiology, 153(4): 
1846-1858. 

Diffenbaugh, N.S., M.A. White, G.V. Jones, and M. Ashfaq, 2011. 
Climate adaptation wedges: A case study of premium wine in the 
western United States. Environmental Research Letters, 6(2). 

Dijkstra, F.A., D. Blumenthal, J.A. Morgan, E. Pendall, Y. Carrillo, and 
R.F. Follett, 2010. Contrasting effects of elevated CO2 and warming 
on nitrogen cycling in a semiarid grassland. New Phytologist, 
187(2): 426-437. 

Dixon, J., and E.W. Hewett, 2000. Factors affecting apple aroma/ 
flavour volatile concentration: A review. New Zealand Journal of 
Crop and Horticultural Science, 28(3): 155-173. 

DOI, 2011. Reclamation: Managing water in the west. Literature synthesis 
on climate change implications for water and environmental 
resources. Technical memorandum 86-68210-2010-03. Department 
of Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Denver, CO. 

Dokoozlian, N.K., and W.M. Kliewer, 1996. Influence of light on grape 
berry growth and composition varies during fruit development. 
Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science, 121(5): 
869-874. 

Dominati, E., M. Patterson, and A. Mackay, 2010. A framework for 
classifying and quantifying the natural capital and ecosystem 
services of soils. Ecological Economics, 69(9): 1858-1868. 

Downes, R., 1972. Effect of temperature on the phenology and grain 
yield of Sorghum bicolor. Australian Journal of Agricultural 
Research, 23(4): 585-594. 

Druta, A., 2001. Effect of long term exposure to high CO2 concentrations 
on photosynthetic characteristics of Prunus avium l. plants. 
Photosynthetica, 39(2): 289-297. 

Dufault, R.J., B. Ward, and R.L. Hassell, 2009. Dynamic relationships 
between field temperatures and romaine lettuce yield and head 
quality. Scientia Horticulturae, 120(4): 452-459. 

Dukes, J.S., N.R. Chiariello, E.E. Cleland, L.A. Moore, M.R. Shaw, S. 
Thayer, T. Tobeck, H.A. Mooney, and C.B. Field, 2005. Responses 
of grassland production to single and multiple global environmental 
changes. PLoS Biol, 3(10): e319. 

Duvick, D.N., and K.G. Cassman, 1999. Postgreen revolution trends 
in yield potential of temperate maize in the north-central United 
States. Crop Science, 39(6): 1622-1630. 

Eagle, A.J., L.R. Henry, L.P. Olander, K.Haugen-Kozyra, N.Millar, 
and G.P. Robertson, 2010. Greenhouse gas mitigation potential of 
agricultural land management in the United States: A synthesis of 
the literature. Technical working group on agricultural greenhouse 
gases (T-AGG) Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions, 
Duke University, Durham, NC http://nicholasinstitute.duke. 
edu/ecosystem/land/TAGGDLitRev. 

Eastburn, D.M., M.M. Degennaro, E.H. Delucia, O. Dermody, and A.J. 
McElrone, 2010. Elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide and ozone 
alter soybean diseases at soyface. Global Change Biology, 16(1): 
320-330. 

Appendix A 


Eaton, F.M., and D.R. Ergle, 1952. Fiber properties and carbohydrate 
and nitrogen levels of cotton plants as influenced by moisture 
supply and fruitfulness. Plant Physiology, 27(3): 541-562. 

Edwards, N.T., and R.J. Norby, 1999. Below-ground respiratory 
responses of sugar maple and red maple saplings to atmospheric 
CO2 enrichment and elevated air temperature. Plant and Soil, 
206(1): 85-97. 

Eigenberg, R.A., T.M. Brown-Brandl, J.A. Nienaber, and G.L. Hahn, 
2005. Dynamic response indicators of heat stress in shaded and 
non-shaded feedlot cattle, part 2: Predictive relationships. Biosystems 
Engineering, 91(1): 111-118. 

Else, M., and C. Atkinson, 2010. Climate change impacts on UK top 
and soft fruit production. Outlook on Agriculture, 39(4): 257-262. 

Elsner, M., L. Cuo, N. Voisin, J. Deems, A. Hamlet, J. Vano, K. 
Mickelson, S.-Y. Lee, and D. Lettenmaier, 2010. Implications of 
21st century climate change for the hydrology of Washington state. 
Climatic Change, 102(1): 225-260. 

ERS, 2012. Wheat data: Yearbook tables http://www.ers.usda.gov/data/ 
wheat/YBtable21.asp. 

Estiarte, M., J. Penuelas, B.A. Kimball, S.B. Idso, R.L. Lamorte, P.J. 
Pinter, G.W. Wall, and R.L. Garcia, 1994. Elevated CO2 effects on 
stomatal density of wheat and sour orange trees. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 45(280): 1665-1668. 

Evans, L.T., 1993. Crop evolution, adaptation, and yield. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge; New York. 

Ezin, V., R.D.L. Pena, and A. Ahanchede, 2010. Flooding tolerance 
of tomato genotypes during vegetative and reproductive stages. 
Brazilian Journal of Plant Physiology, 22: 131-142. 

Farquhar, G.D., S. von Caemmerer, and J.A. Berry, 1980. A biochemical 
model of photosynthetic CO2 assimilation in leaves of C3 
species. Planta (Berlin), 149: 78-90. 

Faver, K.L., T.J. Gerik, P.M. Thaxton, and K.M. El-Zik, 1996. Late 
season water stress in cotton: II. Leaf gas exchange and assimilation 
capacity. Crop Science, 36(4): 922-928. 

Favis-Mortlock, D.T., and A.J.T. Guerra, 1999. The implications of 
general circulation model estimates of rainfall for future erosion: A 
case study from Brazil. CATENA, 37(34): 329-354. 

Favis-Mortlock, D.T., and M.R. Savabi, 1996. Shifts in rates and 
spatial distributions of soil erosion and deposition under climate 
change., in M.G. Anderson and S.M. Brooks (eds.), Advances in 
hillslope processes. Vol. 1. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. 

Fay, P.A., J.M. Blair, M.D. Smith, J.B. Nippert, J.D. Carlisle, and 
A.K. Knapp, 2011. Relative effects of precipitation variability 
and warming on grassland ecosystem function. Biogeosciences 
Discuss., 8(4): 6859-6900. 

Fay, P.A., D.M. Kaufman, J.B. Nippert, J.D. Carlisle, and C.W. Harper, 
2008. Changes in grassland ecosystem function due to extreme 
rainfall events: Implications for responses to climate change. 
Global Change Biology, 14(7): 1600-1608. 

Felicetti, D.A., and L.E. Schrader, 2008. Changes in pigment concentrations 
associated with the degree of sunburn browning of fuji 
apple. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science, 
133(1): 27-34. 

Feng, Z., K. Kobayashi, and E.A. Ainsworth, 2008. Impact of elevated 
ozone concentration on growth, physiology, and yield of wheat 
(Triticum aestivum l.): A meta-analysis. Global Change Biology, 
14(11): 2696-2708. 

Fernandez, G.E., F.J. Louws, J.R. Ballington, and E.B. Poling, 1998. 
Growing raspberries in North Carolina, North Carolina Cooperative 
Extension Service AG-569. 

Ferris, R., R.H. Ellis, T.R. Wheeler, and P. Hadley, 1998. Effect of high 
temperature stress at anthesis on grain yield and biomass of fieldgrown 
crops of wheat. Annals of Botany, 82(5): 631-639. 

Fischlin, A., G.F. Midgley, J.T. Price, R. Leemans, B. Gopal, C. Turley, 
M.D.A. Rounsevell, O.P. Dube, J. Tarazona, and A.A. Velichko, 
2007. Ecosystems, their properties, goods, and services, in M.L. 
Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J.V.D. Linden and C.E. 
Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
pp. 211-272. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Fitzsimons, T., and D.M. Oosterhuis, 2011. Relationships of cotton 
productions and high temperatures for Lee County, Arkansas, 
paper presented at ASA/CSSA/SSSA Annual Meetings. San Antonio, 
TX, Oct 17-20, 2011. 

Flore, J.A., and D.R. Layne, 1999. Photoassimilate production and 
distribution in cherry. HortScience, 34: 1015-1019. 

Forshey, C.G., 1976. Factors affecting chemical thinning of apples. 
New Yorks Food and Life Sci. Bul. 64. 

Frank, K.L., T.L. Mader, J.A. Harrington, G.L. Hahn, and M.S. Davis, 
2001. Climate change effects on livestock production in the Great 
Plains, paper presented at 6th International Livestock Environment 
Symposium, American Society of Agricultural Engineers, St. 
Joseph, MI. 

Frantz, J.M., G. Ritchie, N.N. Cometti, J. Robinson, and B. Bugbee, 
2004. Exploring the limits of crop productivity: Beyond the limits 
of tipburn in lettuce. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural 
Science, 129(3): 331-338. 

Friedel, M.H., 1991. Range condition assessment and the concept of 
thresholds: A viewpoint. Journal of Range Management, 44(5): 
422-426. 

Frumhoff, P., J. McCarthy, J. Mellilo, S. Moser, and D. Wuebbles, 
2006. Climate change in the U.S. Northeast. Union of Concerned 
Scientists Publications, Cambridge (also available at http://www. 
climatechoices.org). 

Fuhrer, J., 2009. Ozone risk for crops and pastures in present and 
future climates. Naturwissenschaften, 96(2): 173-194. 

Gadgil, S., P.R. Seshagiri Rao, and K. Narahari Rao, 2002. Use of 
climate information for farm-level decision making: Rainfed 
groundnut in southern India. Agricultural Systems, 74(3): 431-457. 

Garcia-Sanchez, F., and J.P. Syvertsen, 2006. Salinity tolerance of 
cleopatra mandarin and carrizo citrange rootstock seedlings is 
affected by CO2 enrichment during growth. Journal of the American 
Society for Horticultural Science, 131(1): 24-31. 

Garrett, K.A., S.P. Dendy, E.E. Frank, M.N. Rouse, and S.E. Travers, 
2006. Climate change effects on plant disease: Genomes to ecosystems, 
in Annual review of phytopathology, pp. 489-509. 

Gates, R.N., C.L. Quarin, and C.G.S. Pedreira, 2004. Bahiagrass, in 
L.E. Moser, B.L. Burson and L.E. Sollenberger (eds.), Warmseason 
C4 grasses, pp. 651-680. American Society of Agronomy 
: Crop Science Society of America : Soil Science Society of 
America, Madison, Wis. 

Gaughan, J.B., J. Goopy, and J. Spark, 2002a. Excessive heat load 
index for feedlot cattle. Meat and Livestock-Australia Project 
Report, FLOT.316. 

Gaughan, J.B., N. Lacetera, S.E. Valtorta, H.H. Khalifa, L. Hahn, and 
T. Mader, 2009. Response of domestic animals to animal challenges, 
in K.L. Ebi, I. Burton and G.R. Mcgregor (eds.), Biometeorology 
for adaptation to climate variability and change. Springer, 
Dordrecht; London. 

Gaughan, J.B., and T.L. Mader, 2007. Managing heat stress of feedlot 
cattle through nutrition, in Recent advances in animal nutrition in 
Australia, July 2007, pp. 209-219. Univ. New England, Armidale, 
NSW Australia. 

Gaughan, J.B., T.L. Mader, S.M. Holt, G.L. Hahn, and B.A. Young., 
2002b. Review of current assessment of cattle and microclimate 
during periods of high heat load. Anim. Prod. in Austr 24: 77-80. 

Appendix A 


Gaughan, J.B., T.L. Mader, S.M. Holt, M.J. Josey, and K.J. Rowan, 
1999. Heat tolerance of boran and tuli crossbred steers. Journal of 
Animal Science, 77(9): 2398-2405. 

Gaughan, J.B., T.L. Mader, S.M. Holt, and A. Lisle, 2008. A new heat 
load index for feedlot cattle. Journal of Animal Science, 86(1): 
226-234. 

Gent, M.P.N., 2007. Effect of degree and duration of shade on quality 
of greenhouse tomato. HortScience, 42(3): 514-520. 

Gentile, R., M. Dodd, M. Lieffering, S. Brock, P. Theobald, and P. 
Newton, 2011. Effects of long-term exposure to enriched CO2 on 
the nutrient-supplying capacity of a grassland soil. Biology and 
Fertility of Soils: 1-6. 

Gerik, T.J., K.L. Faver, P.M. Thaxton, and K.M. El-Zik, 1996. Late 
season water stress in cotton: I. Plant growth, water use, and yield. 
Crop Science, 36(4): 914-921. 

German, C., A. Continella, and E. Tribulato, 2003. Net shading influence 
on floral induction on citrus trees. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 614: 
527-533. 

Ghosh, S.C.A., Koh-ichiro; Kusutani, Akihito; Toyota, Masanori, 2000. 
Effects of temperature at different growth stages on nonstructural 
carbohydrate, nitrate reductase activity and yield of potato. Environment 
Control in Biology, 38: 197-206. 

Gipson, J.R., and H.E. Joham, 1968. Influence of night temperature 
on growth and development of cotton (Gossypium birsutum l.). I. 
Fruiting and boll development. Agronomy Journal, 60(3): 292-295. 

Glenn, D.M., 2009. Particle film mechanisms of action that reduce the 
effect of environmental stress in empire apple. Journal of the 
American Society for Horticultural Science, 134(3): 314-321. 

Goncalves, B., V. Falco, J. Moutinho-Pereira, E. Bacelar, F. Peixoto, 
and C. Correia, 2009. Effects of elevated CO2 on grapevine (Vitis 
vinifera l.): Volatile composition, phenolic content, and in vitro 
antioxidant activity of red wine. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 57(1): 265-273. 

Gote, G.N., and P.R. Padghan, 2009. Studies on different thermal 
regimes and thermal sensitivity analysis of tomato genotypes. 
Asian Journal of Environmental Science, 3: 158-161. 

Grauslund, J., 1978. Effects of temperature, shoot-tipping, and carbaryl 
on fruit set of apple trees. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 80: 207-212. 

Grazia, J.d., P.A. Tittonell, and . Chiesa, 2001. Effects of sowing 
date, radiation and nitrogen nutrition on growth pattern and yield 
of lettuce (Lactuca sativa l.) crop. Investigacin Agraria, Produccin 
y Proteccin Vegetales, 16: 355-365. 

Greenland, R.G., 2000. Optimum height at which to kill barley used as 
a living mulch in onions. HortScience, 35(5): 853-855. 

Grimes, D.W., W.L. Dickens, and W.D. Anderson, 1969. Functions 
for cotton (Gossypium hirsutum l.) production from irrigation and 
nitrogen fertilization variables. II. Yield components and quality 
characteristics. Agronomy Journal, 61: 773-776. 

Grimes, D.W., and H. Yamada, 1982. Relation of cotton growth and 
yield to minimum leaf water potential. Crop Science, 22(1): 
134-139. 

Groninger, J.W., J.R. Seiler, S.M. Zedaker, and P.C. Berrang, 1996. 
Effects of CO2 concentration and water availability on growth and 
gas exchange in greenhouse-grown miniature stands of Loblolly 
Pine and Red Maple. Functional Ecology, 10(6): 708-716. 

Groves, F.E. (2009). Improvement of cotton through selective use of 
lint and seed parameters. University of Arkansas, Fayetteville: 
ProQuest, LLC, 2010. 

Guardiola, J.L., and A. Garcia-Luis, 2000. Increasing fruit size in 
citrus. Thinning and stimulation of fruit growth. Plant Growth 
Regulation, 31(1-2): 121-132. 

Gutierrez, A.P., 2005. UC/IPM progress report. 

Gutierrez, A.P., L. Ponti, C.K. Ellis, and T. dOultremont, 2006. Analysis 
of climate effects on agricultural systems. . A report from the 
California Climate Change Center. White Paper CEC-500-2005- 
188-SF, University of California, Berkeley. 

Hahn, G.L., 1995. Environmental management for improved livestock 
performance, health and well-being. Japanese journal of 
livestock management, 30(3): 113-127 %U http://ci.nii.ac.jp/ 
naid/110003852999/en/. 

Hahn, G.L., T. Brown-Brandl, R.A. Eigenberg, J.B. Gaughan, T.L. 
Mader, and J.A. Nienaber, 2005. Climate change and livestock: 
Challenges and adaptive responses of animals and production systems, 
paper presented at International Conference on Biometeorology. 
September 2005. Bavaria, Germany. 

Hahn, G.L., T.L. Mader, and R.A. Eigenberg, 2003. Perspective on 
development of thermal indices for animal studies and management, 
in N. Lacetera (ed.) Interactions between climate and animal 
production (EAAP Technical Series 7). Wageningen Academic 
Publishers, Wageningen, the Netherlands. 

Hahn, G.L., T.L. Mader, J.B. Gaughan, Q. Hu, and J.A. Nienaber., 
1999. Waves and their impacts on feedlot cattle, paper presented 
at Proceedings of the 15th International Congress of Biometeorology 
and International Congress on Urban Climatology. Sydney, 
Australia. 

Hahn, G.L., and T.L. Mader., 1997. Heat waves in relation to thermoregulation, 
feeding behavior and mortality of feedlot cattle, 
paper presented at Proceedings of the 5th International Livestock 
Environ Symp. American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 
Joseph, Mich. 

Hall, A.E., 2001. Crop responses to environment. CRC Press, Boca 
Raton. 

Hance, T., J. van Baaren, P. Vernon, and G. Boivin, 2007. Impact 
of extreme temperatures on parasitoids in a climate change 
perspective, in Annual review of entomology, pp. 107-126. Annual 
Reviews, Palo Alto. 

Hancock, A.M., B. Brachi, N. Faure, M.W. Horton, L.B. Jarymowycz, 
F.G. Sperone, C. Toomajian, F. Roux, and J. Bergelson, 2011. 
Adaptation to climate across the Arabidopsis thaliana genome. 
Science, 333(6052): 83-86. 

Hao, X., Wang, Q. and Khosla, S. , 2008. Responses of greenhouse 
tomatoes to summer CO2 enrichment. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 797: 
241-246. 

Harbut, R.M., J.A. Sullivan, and J.T.A. Proctor, 2010. Temperature 
affects dry matter production and net carbon exchange rate of 
lower-ploidy Fragaria species and species hybrids. Canadian 
Journal of Plant Science, 90(6): 885-892. 

Harris, M.O., J.J. Stuart, M. Mohan, S. Nair, R.J. Lamb, and O. Rohfritsch, 
2003. Grasses and gall midges: Plant defense and insect 
adaptation. Annual Review of Entomology, 48(1): 549-577. 

Hatchett, J.H., K.J. Starks, and J.A. Webster, 1987. Insect and mite 
pests of wheat, in E.G. Heyne (ed.) Wheat and wheat improvement, 
pp. 625-675. American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science 
Society of America, Soil Science Society of America, Madison, 
Wis., USA. 

Hatfield, J.L., 2006. Multifunctionality of agriculture and farming 
system design: Perspectives from the United States. Bibliotecha 
Fragmenta Agronomica, 11: 43-52. 

Hatfield, J.L., K.J. Boote, B.A. Kimball, L.H. Ziska, R.C. Izaurralde, 
D. Ort, A.M. Thomson, and D. Wolfe, 2011. Climate impacts on 
agriculture: Implications for crop production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 351-370. 

Hatfield, J.L., T.J. Sauer, and J.H. Prueger, 2001. Managing soils to 
achieve greater water use efficiency. Agron. J., 93(2): 271-280. 

Hauagge, R., IPR julieta, a new early low chill requirement apple 
cultivar. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 872: 193-196. 

Appendix A 


Havstad, K.M., D.C. Peters, B. Allen-Diaz, J. Bartolome, B.T. Bestelmeyer, 
D. Briske, J. Brown, M. Brunson, J.E. Herrick, L. Huntsinger, 
P. Johnson, L. Joyce, R. Pieper, A.J. Svejcar, and J. Yao, 
2009. The western United States rangelands, a major resource, 
in W.F. Wedin and S.L. Fales (eds.), Grassland : Quietness and 
strength for a new American agriculture. American Society of 
Agronomy, Crop Science Society of America, Soil Society of 
America, Madison, WI. 

Hayhoe, K., C.P. Wake, T.G. Huntington, L.F. Luo, M.D. Schwartz, J. 
Sheffield, E. Wood, B. Anderson, J. Bradbury, A. DeGaetano, T.J. 
Troy, and D. Wolfe, 2007. Past and future changes in climate and 
hydrological indicators in the U.S. Northeast. Climate Dynamics, 
28(4): 381-407. 

Heagle, A.S., 1989. Ozone and crop yield. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 
27: 397-423. 

Heal, G.M., 2000. Nature and the marketplace : Capturing the value of 
ecosystem services. Island Press, Washington, D.C. 

Hedhly, A., J.I. Hormaza, and M. Herrera, 2004. Effect of temperature 
on pollen tube kinetics and dynamics in sweet cherry, Prunus 
avium (rosaceae). American Journal of Botany, 91(4): 558-564. 

Hegland, S.J., A. Nielsen, A. Lzaro, A.-L. Bjerknes, and . Totland, 
2009. How does climate warming affect plant-pollinator interactions? 
Ecology Letters, 12(2): 184-195. 

Heide, O.M., and A.K. Prestrud, 2005. Low temperature, but not photoperiod, 
controls growth cessation and dormancy induction and 
release in apple and pear. Tree Physiology, 25(1): 109-114. 

Heisler-White, J.L., J.M. Blair, E.F. Kelly, K. Harmoney, and A.K. 
Knapp, 2009. Contingent productivity responses to more extreme 
rainfall regimes across a grassland biome. Global Change Biology, 
15(12): 2894-2904. 

Henderson, M.S., and D.L. Robinson, 1982. Environmental influences 
on yield and in vitro true digestibility of warm-season perennial 
grasses and the relationships to fiber components. Agronomy 
Journal, 74(6): 943-946. 

Heong, K.L., P.S. Teng, and K. Moody, 1995. Managing rice pests with 
less chemicals. GeoJournal, 35(3): 337-349. 

Herrero, M.P., and R.R. Johnson, 1980. High temperature stress and 
pollen viability of maize. Crop Sci., 20(6): 796-800. 

Hesketh, J.D., D.L. Myhre, and C.R. Willey, 1973. Temperature control 
of time intervals between vegetative and reproductive events in 
soybeans. Crop Sci., 13(2): 250-254. 

Heuvelink, E., M. Bakker, L.F.M. Marcelis, M. Raaphorst, S. Pascale, 
G. de Scarascia Mugnozza, A. Maggio, and E. Schettini, 2008. 
Climate and yield in a closed greenhouse. Acta Horticulturae, 801: 
1083-1092. 

Hileman, D.R., G. Huluka, P.K. Kenjige, N. Sinha, N.C. Bhattacharya, 
P.K. Biswas, K.F. Lewin, J. Nagy, and G.R. Hendrey, 1994. 
Canopy photosynthesis and transpiration of field-grown cotton 
exposed to free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE) and differential irrigation. 
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 70(14): 189-207. 

Hill, A.R., 1996. Nitrate removal in stream riparian zones. Journal of 
Environmental Quality., 25(4): 743-755. 

Hodges, H.F., K.R. Reddy, J.M. McKinnon, and V.R. Reddy, 1993. 
Temperature effects on cotton. Mississippi State University, MS, 
Mississippi Agr. & Forestry Exp. Sta. 

Hodges, T., and J.T. Ritchie, 1991. The CERES-Wheat phenology 
model, in T. Hodges (ed.) Predicting crop phenology, pp. 115-131. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton. 

Hopkins, A., and A. Del Prado, 2007. Implications of climate change 
for grassland in Europe: Impacts, adaptations and mitigation 
options: A review. Grass & Forage Science, 62(2): 118-126. 

Hovenden, M.J., K.E. Wills, J.K. Vander Schoor, A.L. Williams, and 
P.C.D. Newton, 2008. Flowering phenology in a species-rich temperate 
grassland is sensitive to warming but not elevated CO2. New 
Phytologist, 178(4): 815-822. 

Howitt, R., J. Medelln-Azuara, and D. MacEwan, 2010. Climate 
change, markets, and technology. Choices, 25(3), http://www. 
choicesmagazine.org/magazine/article.php?article=148. 

Huang, H., and M. Khanna, 2010. An econometric analysis of U.S. 
crop yields and cropland acreages: Implications for the impact of 
climate change, paper presented at AAEA annual meeting. Denver, 
Colorado, 25-27July 

Hubbard, K.G., and F.J. Flores-Mendoza, 1995. Relating United States 
crop land use to natural resources and climate change. Journal of 
Climate, 8(2): 329-335. 

Hutton, R.J., and J.J. Landsberg, 2000. Temperature sums experienced 
before harvest partially determine the post-maturation juicing 
quality of oranges grown in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas 
(MIA) of New South Wales. Journal of the Science of Food and 
Agriculture, 80(2): 275-283. 

Idso, S.B., and B.A. Kimball, 1997. Effects of long-term atmospheric 
CO2 enrichment on the growth and fruit production of sour orange 
trees. Global Change Biology, 3(2): 89-96. 

Idso, S.B., B.A. Kimball, G.W. Wall, R.L. Garcia, R. LaMorte, P.J. 
Pinter Jr, J.R. Mauney, G.R. Hendrey, K. Lewin, and J. Nagy, 
1994. Effects of free-air CO2 enrichment on the light response 
curve of net photosynthesis in cotton leaves. Agricultural and 
Forest Meteorology, 70(14): 183-188. 

Iglesias, A., K. Avis, M.Benzie, P. Fisher, M. Harley, N. Hodgson, L. 
Horrocks, M. Moneo, and J. Webb, 2007. Adaptation to climate 
change in the agricultural sector. Report to European commission 
directorate - general for agriculture and rural development. 
ED05334 http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/analysis/external/climate/. 

Iglesias, D.J., M. Cercs, J.M. Colmenero-Flores, M.A. Naranjo, G. 
Ros, E. Carrera, O. Ruiz-Rivero, I. Lliso, R. Morillon, F.R. Tadeo, 
and M. Talon, 2007. Physiology of citrus fruiting. Brazilian Journal 
of Plant Physiology, 19: 333-362. 

Immerzeel, W.W., L.P.H. van Beek, and M.F.P. Bierkens, 2010. 
Climate change will affect the Asian water towers. Science, 
328(5984): 1382-1385. 

IPCC, 2007b. Climate change 2007 : Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K.; New York. 

Ito, J., S. Hasegawa, K. Fujita, S. Ogasawara, and T. Fujiwara, 2002. 
Changes in water relations induced by CO2 enrichment govern 
diurnal stem and fruit diameters of Japanese pear. Plant Science, 
163(6): 1169-1176. 

Jackson, J.E., 1980. Light interception and utilization by orchard 
systems, in Horticultural reviews, pp. 208-267. John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. 

Jackson, J.E., P.J.C. Hamer, and M.F. Wickenden, 1983. Effects of 
early spring temperatures on the set of fruits of Coxs orange 
pippin apple and year-to-year variation in its yields. Acta Hort. 
(ISHS), 139: 75-82. 

Jentsch, A., J. Kreyling, M. Elmer, E. Gellesch, B. Glaser, K. Grant, 
R. Hein, M. Lara, H. Mirzae, S.E. Nadler, L. Nagy, D. Otieno, 
K. Pritsch, U. Rascher, M. Schdler, M. Schloter, B.K. Singh, J. 
Stadler, J. Walter, and C. Wellstein, 2011. Climate extremes initiate 
ecosystem-regulating functions while maintaining productivity. 
Journal of Ecology, 99(3): 689-702. 

Jones, G., M. White, O. Cooper, and K. Storchmann, 2005. Climate 
change and global wine quality. Climatic Change, 73(3): 319-343. 

Jones, G.V., 2005. Climate change in the western United States grape 
growing regions. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 689: 41-60. 

Appendix A 


Jones, G.V., and G.B. Goodrich, 2007. Influence of climate variability 
on wine regions in the western USA and on wine quality in the 
Napa Valley. Climate Research, 35(3): 241-154. 

Kadir, S., G. Sidhu, and K. Al-Khatib, 2006. Strawberry (Fragaria 
.ananassa duch.) growth and productivity as affected by temperature. 
HortScience, 41(6): 1423-1430. 

Kakani, V.G., K.R. Reddy, S. Koti, T.P. Wallace, P.V.V. Prasad, V.R. 
Reddy, and D. Zhao, 2005. Differences in in vitro pollen germination 
and pollen tube growth of cotton cultivars in response to high 
temperature. Annals of Botany, 96(1): 59-67. 

Karlen, D.L., N.C. Wollenhaupt, D.C. Erbach, E.C. Berry, J.B. Swan, 
N.S. Eash, and J.L. Jordahl, 1994a. Crop residue effects on 
soil quality following 10-years of no-till corn. Soil and Tillage 
Research, 31(23): 149-167. 

Karlen, D.L., N.C. Wollenhaupt, D.C. Erbach, E.C. Berry, J.B. Swan, 
N.S. Eash, and J.L. Jordahl, 1994b. Long-term tillage effects on 
soil quality. Soil and Tillage Research, 32(4): 313-327. 

Kean, S., 2010. Besting Johnny Appleseed. Science, 328(5976): 
301-303. 

Kelm, M.A., J.A. Flore, and C.W. Beninger, 2005. Effect of elevated 
CO2 levels and leaf area removal on sorbitol, sucrose, and 
phloridzin content in gala/malling 9 apple leaves. Journal of the 
American Society for Horticultural Science, 130(3): 326-330. 

Keutgen, N., and K. Chen, 2001. Responses of citrus leaf photosynthesis, 
chlorophyll fluorescence, macronutrient and carbohydrate 
contents to elevated CO2. Journal of Plant Physiology, 158(10): 
1307-1316. 

Kim, H.Y., T. Horie, H. Nakagawa, and K. Wada, 1996. Effects of 
elevated CO2 concentration and high temperature on growth and 
yield of rice 2: The effect on yield and its components of ahihikari 
rice. Japanese Journal of Crop Science, 65(4): 644-651. 

Kim, H.-Y., M. Lieffering, K. Kobayashi, M. Okada, and S.H.U. 
Miura, 2003. Seasonal changes in the effects of elevated CO2 on 
rice at three levels of nitrogen supply: A free air CO2 enrichment 
(FACE) experiment. Global Change Biology, 9(6): 826-837. 

Kimball, B.A., 2011. Effects and interactions with water, nitrogen and 
temperature, in D. Hillel and C. Rosenzweig (eds.), Handbook of 
climate change and agroecosystems : Impacts, adaptation, and 
mitigation, pp. 87-107. Imperial College Press ; Distributed by 
World Scientific Publishing Co., London; Singapore; Hackensack, 
NJ. 

Kimball, B.A., S.B. Idso, S. Johnson, and M.C. Rillig, 2007. Seventeen 
years of carbon dioxide enrichment of sour orange trees: Final 
results. Global Change Biology, 13(10): 2171-2183. 

Kimball, B.A., K. Kobayashi, and M. Bindi, 2002. Responses of agricultural 
crops to free-air CO2 enrichment. Advances in Agronomy, 
Vol 77, 77: 293-368. 

Kiniry, J.R., and R. Bonhomme, 1991. Predicting maize phenology, 
in T. Hodges (ed.) Predicting crop phenology, pp. 115-131. CRC 
Press, Boca Raton. 

Kittock, D.L., W.C. Hofmann, and E.L. Turcotte, 1988. Estimation of 
heat tolerance improvement in recent American pima cotton cultivars. 
Journal of Agronomy & Crop Science, 161(5): 305-309. 

Klamkowski, K., and W. Treder, 2008. Response to drought stress of 
three strawberry cultivars grown under greenhouse conditions. 
Journal of Fruit and Ornamental Plant Research, 16: 179-188. 

Klein, J.A., J. Harte, and X.-Q. Zhao, 2007. Experimental warming, 
not grazing, decreases rangeland quality on the Tibetan plateau. 
Ecological Applications, 17(2): 541-557. 

Knapp, A.K., C. Beier, D.D. Briske, A.T. Classen, Y. Luo, M. 
Reichstein, M.D. Smith, S.D. Smith, J.E. Bell, P.A. Fay, J.L. 
Heisler, S.W. Leavitt, R. Sherry, B. Smith, and E. Weng, 2008. 
Consequences of more extreme precipitation regimes for terrestrial 
ecosystems. BioScience, 58(9): 811-821. 

Knowles, N., M.D. Dettinger, and D.R. Cayan, 2006. Trends in 
snowfall versus rainfall in the western United States. Journal of 
Climate, 19(18): 4545-4559. 

Kobayashi, T., K. Ishiguro, T. Nakajima, H.Y. Kim, M. Okada, and K. 
Kobayashi, 2006. Effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration 
on the infection of rice blast and sheath blight. Phytopathology, 
96(4): 425-431. 

Kobza, J., and G.E. Edwards, 1987. Influences of leaf temperature on 
photosynthetic carbon metabolism in wheat. Plant Physiology, 83: 
69-74. 

Krner, C., 2006. Plant CO2 responses: An issue of definition, time and 
resource supply. New Phytologist, 172(3): 393-411. 

Kreikemeier, W.M., and T.L. Mader, 2004. Effects of growth-promoting 
agents and season on yearling feedlot heifer performance. 
Journal of Animal Science, 82(8): 2481-2488. 

Kubiske, M.E., and K.S. Pregitzer, 1996. Effects of elevated CO2 and 
light availability on the photosynthetic light response of trees of 
contrasting shade tolerance. Tree Physiology, 16(3): 351-358. 

Kucharik, C.J., 2006. A multidecadal trend of earlier corn planting in 
the central USA. Agronomy Journal, 98(6): 1544-1550. 

Kucharik, C.J., and S.P. Serbin, 2008. Impacts of recent climate change 
on Wisconsin corn and soybean yield trends. Environmental 
Research Letters, 3(3): 034003. 

Kunkel, K.E., K. Andsager, and D.R. Easterling, 1999. Long-term 
trends in extreme precipitation events over the conterminous 
United States and Canada. Journal of Climate, 12(8): 2515-2527. 

Laing, D.R., P.G. Jones, and J.H. Davis, 1984. Common bean (Phaseolus 
vulgaris l.), in P.R. Goldsworthy and N.M. Fisher (eds.), The 
physiology of tropical field crops, pp. 305-351. Wiley, Chichester; 
New York. 

Lal, R., 1997. Soil processes and the carbon cycle. CRC, Boca Raton. 

Lal, R., J.A. Delgado, P.M. Groffman, N. Millar, C. Dell, and A. Rotz, 
2011. Management to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Journal 
of Soil and Water Conservation, 66(4): 276-285. 

Langley, J.A., and J.P. Megonigal, 2010. Ecosystem response to 
elevated CO2 levels limited by nitrogen-induced plant species shift. 
Nature, 466(7302): 96-99. 

Larson, K.D., S.T. Koike, and F.G. Zalom, 2005. Bed mulch treatment 
affects strawberry fruit bronzing and yield performance. HortScience, 
40(1): 72-75. 

Leakey, A.D.B., E.A. Ainsworth, C.J. Bernacchi, A. Rogers, S.P. 
Long, and D.R. Ort, 2009a. Elevated CO2 effects on plant carbon, 
nitrogen, and water relations: Six important lessons from FACE. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 60(10): 2859-2876. 

Leakey, A.D.B., C.J. Bernacchi, F.G. Dohleman, D.R. Ort, and S.P. 
Long, 2004. Will photosynthesis of maize (Zea mays) in the U.S. 
corn belt increase in future CO2 rich atmospheres? An analysis of 
diurnal courses of CO2 uptake under free-air concentration enrichment 
(FACE). Global Change Biology, 10(6): 951-962. 

Leakey, A.D.B., M. Uribelarrea, E.A. Ainsworth, S.L. Naidu, A. 
Rogers, D.R. Ort, and S.P. Long, 2006. Photosynthesis, productivity, 
and yield of maize are not affected by open-air elevation of 
CO2 concentration in the absence of drought. Plant Physiology, 
140(2): 779-790. 

Leakey, A.D.B., F. Xu, K.M. Gillespie, J.M. McGrath, E.A. Ainsworth, 
and D.R. Ort, 2009b. Genomic basis for stimulated respiration by 
plants growing under elevated carbon dioxide. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 106(9): 3597-3602. 

Leavitt, S.W., S.B. Idso, B.A. Kimball, J.M. Burns, A. Sinha, and L. 
Stott, 2003. The effect of long-term atmospheric CO2 enrichment 
on the intrinsic water-use efficiency of sour orange trees. Chemosphere, 
50(2): 217-222. 

Appendix A 


Ledesma, N., and N. Sugiyama, 2005. Pollen quality and performance 
in strawberry plants exposed to high-temperature stress. Journal of 
the American Society for Horticultural Science, 130(3): 341-347. 

Ledesma, N.A., M. Nakata, and N. Sugiyama, 2008. Effect of high 
temperature stress on the reproductive growth of strawberry cvs. 
nyoho and toyonoka. Scientia Horticulturae, 116(2): 186-193. 

Leuzinger, S., Y. Luo, C. Beier, W. Dieleman, S. Vicca, and C. Krner, 
2011. Do global change experiments overestimate impacts on 
terrestrial ecosystems? Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 26(5): 
236-241. 

Lewis, H., 2000. Environmental regulation of yield and quality 
components in American upland cotton. in Proeceedings of the 
conference on Genetic Control of Fiber and Seed Quality. Cotton 
Incorporated, Cary, NC. 

Li, H., T. Li, R.J. Gordon, S.K. Asiedu, and K. Hu, 2010. Strawberry 
plant fruiting efficiency and its correlation with solar irradiance, 
temperature and reflectance water index variation. Environmental 
and Experimental Botany, 68(2): 165-174. 

Lin-Wang, K.U.I., D. Micheletti, J. Palmer, R. Volz, L. Lozano, R. 
Espley, R.P. Hellens, D. Chagn, D.D. Rowan, M. Troggio, I. 
Iglesias, and A.C. Allan, 2011. High temperature reduces apple 
fruit colour via modulation of the anthocyanin regulatory complex. 
Plant, Cell & Environment, 34(7): 1176-1190. 

Lobell, D.B., and G.P. Asner, 2003. Climate and management contributions 
to recent trends in U.S. agricultural yields. Science, 
299(5609): 1032. 

Lobell, D.B., M. Banziger, C. Magorokosho, and B. Vivek, 2011. 
Nonlinear heat effects on African maize as evidenced by historical 
yield trials. Nature Clim. Change, 1(1): 42-45. 

Lobell, D.B., K.G. Cassman, and C.B. Field, 2009. Crop yield gaps: 
Their importance, magnitudes, and causes. Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources, 34(1): 179-204. 

Lobell, D.B., and C.B. Field, 2007. Global scale climatecrop yield 
relationships and the impacts of recent warming. Environmental 
Research Letters, 2(1): 014002. 

Lobell, D.B., and C.B. Field, 2008. Estimation of the carbon dioxide 
(CO2) fertilization effect using growth rate anomalies of CO2 and 
crop yields since 1961. Global Change Biology, 14(1): 39-45. 

Lobell, D.B., C.B. Field, K.N. Cahill, and C. Bonfils, 2006. Impacts of 
future climate change on California perennial crop yields: Model 
projections with climate and crop uncertainties. Agricultural and 
Forest Meteorology, 141(24): 208-218. 

Lobell, D.B., W. Schlenker, and J. Costa-Roberts, 2011. Climate trends 
and global crop production since 1980. Science, 333: 208-218. 

Loka, D.A., and D.M. Oosterhuis, 2010. Effect of high night temperatures 
on cotton respiration, ATP levels and carbohydrate content. 
Environmental and Experimental Botany, 68(3): 258-263. 

Loka, D.A., D.M. Oosterhuis, and G.L. Ritchie, 2011. Water-deficit 
stress in cotton, in D.M. Oosterhuis (ed.) Stress physiology in 
cotton. The Cotton Foundation, Cordova, TN. 

Luck, J., M. Spackman, A. Freeman, P. Trebicki, W. Griffiths, K. 
Finlay, and S. Chakraborty, 2011. Climate change and diseases of 
food crops. Plant Pathology, 60(1): 113-121. 

Luck, J.D., T. Mueller, A.C. Pike, and S.A. Shearer, 2010. Grassed 
waterway planning model evaluated for agricultural fields in the 
western coal field physiographic region of Kentucky. Journal of 
Soil and Water Conservation, 65(5): 280-288. 

Luo, Q., W. Bellotti, M. Williams, and E. Wang, 2009. Adaptation to 
climate change of wheat growing in South Australia: Analysis of 
management and breeding strategies. Agriculture, Ecosystems and 
Environment, 129(13): 261-267. 

Luo, Y., R. Sherry, X. Zhou, and S. Wan, 2009. Terrestrial carboncycle 
feedback to climate warming: Experimental evidence on 
plant regulation and impacts of biofuel feedstock harvest. GCB 
Bioenergy, 1(1): 62-74. 

Luo, Y., B.O. Su, W.S. Currie, J.S. Dukes, A. Finzi, U. Hartwig, B. 
Hungate, R.E. Mc Murtrie, R.A.M. Oren, W.J. Parton, D.E. Pataki, 
M.R. Shaw, D.R. Zak, and C.B. Field, 2004. Progressive nitrogen 
limitation of ecosystem responses to rising atmospheric carbon 
dioxide. BioScience, 54(8): 731-739. 

Mader, T., M. Davis, and J. Gaughan, 2007. Effect of sprinkling on 
feedlot microclimate and cattle behavior. International Journal of 
Biometeorology, 51(6): 541-551. 

Mader, T., K. Frank, J. Harrington, G. Hahn, and J. Nienaber, 2009. 
Potential climate change effects on warm-season livestock production 
in the Great Plains. Climatic Change, 97(3): 529-541. 

Mader, T.L., 2003. Environmental stress in confined beef cattle. Journal 
of Animal Science, 81(14 suppl 2): E110-E119. 

Mader, T.L., L. J. Johnson, T. M. Brown-Brandl, and J. B. Gaughan, 
2008. Climate conditions in bedded confinement buildings paper 
presented at the ASABE International Livestock Environment 
Symposium. Aug. 31-Sept 04, 2008. Iguassu Falls City, Brazil. 

Mader, T.L., J.M. Dahlquist, and J.B. Gaughan, 1997. Wind protection 
effects and airflow patterns in outside feedlots. Journal of Animal 
Science, 75(1): 26-36. 

Mader, T.L., J.M. Dahlquist, G.L. Hahn, and J.B. Gaughan, 1999. 
Shade and wind barrier effects on summertime feedlot cattle performance. 
Journal of Animal Science, 77(8): 2065-2072. 

Mader, T.L., and M.S. Davis, 2004. Effect of management strategies 
on reducing heat stress of feedlot cattle: Feed and water intake. 
Journal of Animal Science, 82(10): 3077-3087. 

Mader, T.L., M.S. Davis, and T. Brown-Brandl, 2006. Environmental 
factors influencing heat stress in feedlot cattle. Journal of Animal 
Science, 84(3): 712-719. 

Mader, T.L., L.J. Johnson, and J.B. Gaughan, 2010. A comprehensive 
index for assessing environmental stress in animals. Journal of 
Animal Science, 88(6): 2153-2165. 

Mader, T.L., L.J. Johnson, and J.B. Gaughan, 2011. Erratum to A 
comprehensive index for assessing environmental stress in animals 
(J. Anim. Sci. 88:21532165). Journal of Animal Science, 
89(9): 2955. 

Mader, T.L., and W.M. Kreikemeier, 2006. Effects of growth-promoting 
agents and season on blood metabolites and body temperature 
in heifers. Journal of Animal Science, 84(4): 1030-1037. 

Maiti, R.K., 1996. Sorghum science. Science Pub., Lebanon, NH. 

Manderscheid, R., and H.J. Weigel, 1997. Photosynthetic and growth 
responses of old and modern spring wheat cultivars to atmospheric 
CO2 enrichment. Agriculture, Ecosystems, and Environment, 64(1): 
65-73. 

Marani, A., and A. Amirav, 1971. Effects of soil moisture stress on 
two varieties of upland cotton in Israel I. The coastal plain region. 
Experimental Agriculture, 7(03): 213-224. 

Marani, A., D.N. Baker, V.R. Reddy, and J.M. McKinion, 1985. Effect 
of water stress on canopy senescence and carbon exchange rates in 
cotton. Crop Science, 25(5): 798-802. 

Marini, R.P., D. Sowers, and M.C. Marini, 1991. Peach fruit quality 
is affected by shade during final swell of fruit growth J. Am. Soc. 
Hort. Sci., 116: 383-389. 

Marcellos, H., 1977. Wheat frost injury  freezing stress and photosynthesis. 
Australian Journal of Agricultural Research, 28(4): 
557-564. 

Appendix A 


Markelz, R.J.C., R.S. Strellner, and A.D.B. Leakey, 2011. Impairment 
of C4 photosynthesis by drought is exacerbated by limiting 
nitrogen and ameliorated by elevated CO2 in maize. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 62(9): 3235-3246. 

Martin, P., and S.N. Johnson, 2011. Evidence that elevated CO2 
reduces resistance to the European large raspberry aphid in some 
raspberry cultivars. Journal of Applied Entomology, 135(3): 
237-240. 

Massey, J.H., E.F. Scherder, R.E. Talbert, R.M. Zablotowicz, M.A. 
Locke, M.A. Weaver, M.C.Smith, and R.W. Steinriede, 2003. 
Reduced water use and methane emissions from rice grown using 
intermittent irrigation, paper presented at Proceedings of the 33rd 
Annual Mississippi Water Resources Conference. Mississippi 
Water Resources Research Institute. 

Matsushima, S., T. Tanaka, and T. Hoshino, 1964. Analysis of yield 
determining process and its application to yield-prediction and 
culture improvement of lowland rice. LXX. Combined effect of air 
temperature and water temperature at different stages of growth on 
the grain yield and its components of lowland rice. Proc. Crop Sci. 
Soc. Jpn, 33: 53-58. 

Mauney, J.R., B.A. Kimball, P.J. Pinter Jr, R.L. LaMorte, K.F. Lewin, 
J. Nagy, and G.R. Hendrey, 1994. Growth and yield of cotton in 
response to a free-air carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE) environment. 
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 70(14): 49-67. 

Mayer, P.M., S.K. Reynolds, M.D. McCutchen, and T.J. Canfield, 
2007. Meta-analysis of nitrogen removal in riparian buffers. Journal 
of Environmental Quality, 36(4): 1172-1180. 

McArtney, S., M. Parker, J. Obermiller, and T. Hoyt, 2011. Effects of 
1-methylcyclopropene on firmness loss and the development of 
rots in apple fruit kept in farm markets or at elevated temperatures. 
HortTechnology, 21(4): 494-499. 

McCarthy, J., O. Canziani, N. Leary, D. Kokken, and K. White, 2001. 
Climate change 2001: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. 
Annex B: Glossary of terms, in Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press Cambridge and 
New York. 

McElrone, A.J., C.D. Reid, K.A. Hoye, E. Hart, and R.B. Jackson, 
2005. Elevated CO2 reduces disease incidence and severity of a 
red maple fungal pathogen via changes in host physiology and leaf 
chemistry. Global Change Biology, 11(10): 1828-1836. 

McGrath, J.M., and D.B. Lobell, 2011. An independent method of 
deriving the carbon dioxide fertilization effect in dry conditions 
using historical yield data from wet and dry years. Global Change 
Biology, 17(8): 2689-2696. 

McKeown, A., J. Warland, and M.R. McDonald, 2005. Long-term 
marketable yields of horticultural crops in southern Ontario in 
relation to seasonal climate. Canadian Journal of Plant Science, 
85(2): 431-438. 

McKeown, A.W., J. Warland, M.R. McDonald, and C.M. Hutchinson, 
2004. Cool season crop production trends: A possible signal for 
global warming. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 638: 241-248. 

McMichael, B.L., and J.J. Burke, 1994. Metabolic activity of cotton 
roots in response to temperature. Environmental and Experimental 
Botany, 34(2): 201-206. 

McMichael, B.L., and J.D. Hesketh, 1982. Field investigations of the 
response of cotton to water deficits. Field Crops Research, 5(0): 
319-333. 

McWilliams, D., 2003. Drought strategies for cotton. Cooperative 
extension service circular 582. New Mexico State Univ. College of 
Agriculture and Home Economics, Las Cruces, NM. 

Medlyn, B.E., C.V.M. Barton, M.S.J. Broadmeadow, R. Ceulemans, 
P. De Angelis, M. Forstreuter, M. Freeman, S.B. Jackson, S. 
Kellomki, E. Laitat, A. Rey, P. Roberntz, B.D. Sigurdsson, J. 
Strassemeyer, K. Wang, P.S. Curtis, and P.G. Jarvis, 2001. Stomatal 
conductance of forest species after long-term exposure to elevated 
CO2 concentration: A synthesis. New Phytologist, 149(2): 247-264. 

Meyer, V.G., 1966. Environmental effects on the differentiation of 
abnormal cotton flowers. American Journal of Botany, 53(10): 
976-980. 

Miller, N.L., K.E. Bashford, and E. Strem, 2003. Potential impacts of 
climate change on California hydrology 1. JAWRA Journal of the 
American Water Resources Association, 39(4): 771-784. 

Mishra, V., and K.A. Cherkauer, 2010. Retrospective droughts in the 
crop growing season: Implications to corn and soybean yield in the 
midwestern United States. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 
150(78): 1030-1045. 

Mohammed, A.R., and L. Tarpley, 2009. High nighttime temperatures 
affect rice productivity through altered pollen germination and 
spikelet fertility. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 149(67): 
999-1008. 

Montgomery, D.R., 2007. Soil erosion and agricultural sustainability. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(33): 
13268-13272. 

Moran, K.K., and J.D. Jastrow, 2010. Elevated carbon dioxide does 
not offset loss of soil carbon from a cornsoybean agroecosystem. 
Environmental Pollution, 158(4): 1088-1094. 

Morgan, J.A., 2005. Rising atmospheric CO2 and global climate 
change: Responses and management implications for grazing 
lands, in S.G. Reynolds and J. Frame (eds.), Grasslands : 
Developments, opportunities, perspectives. Food and Agricultural 
Organization of the United Nations; Science Publishers, Inc., 
Rome; Enfield, NH. 

Morgan, J.A., J.D. Derner, D.G. Milchunas, and E. Pendall, 2008. 
Management implications of global change for Great Plains rangelands. 
Rangelands, 30(3): 18-22. 

Morgan, J.A., D.R. LeCain, E. Pendall, D.M. Blumenthal, B.A. 
Kimball, Y. Carrillo, D.G. Williams, J. Heisler-White, F.A. 
Dijkstra, and M. West, 2011. C4 grasses prosper as carbon dioxide 
eliminates desiccation in warmed semi-arid grassland. Nature, 
476(7359): 202-205. 

Morgan, J.A., D.G. Milchunas, D.R. LeCain, M. West, and A.R. 
Mosier, 2007. Carbon dioxide enrichment alters plant community 
structure and accelerates shrub growth in the shortgrass steppe. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(37): 
14724-14729. 

Morgan, J.A., D.E. Pataki, C. Krner, H. Clark, S.J. Grosso, J.M. 
Grnzweig, A.K. Knapp, A.R. Mosier, P.C.D. Newton, P.A. 
Niklaus, J.B. Nippert, R.S. Nowak, W.J. Parton, H.W. Polley, and 
M.R. Shaw, 2004. Water relations in grassland and desert ecosystems 
exposed to elevated atmospheric CO2. Oecologia, 140(1): 
11-25. 

Mori, K., N. Goto-Yamamoto, M. Kitayama, and K. Hashizume, 2007. 
Loss of anthocyanins in red-wine grape under high temperature. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 58(8): 1935-1945. 

Moss, G.I., 1976. Temperature effects on flower initiation in sweet 
orange (citrus-sinensis). Australian Journal of Agricultural 
Research, 27(3): 399-407. 

Moutinho-Pereira, J., B. Goncalves, E. Bacelar, J.B. Cunha, J. 
Coutinho, and C.M. Correia, 2009. Effects of elevated CO2 on 
grapevine (Vitis vinifera l.): Physiological and yield attributes. 
Vitis, 48(4): 159-165. 

Moya, T.B., L.H.H. Ziska, O.S. Namuco, and D. Olszyk, 1998. Growth 
dynamics and genotypic variation in tropical, field-grown paddy 
rice (Oryza sativa l.) in response to increasing carbon dioxide and 
temperature. Global Change Biology, 4(6): 645-656. 

Appendix A 


Muchow, R.C., T.R. Sinclair, and J.M. Bennett, Temperature and solar 
radiation effects on potential maize yield across locations. Agron. 
J., 82(2): 338-343. 

Mueller, T.G., H. Cetin, C.R. Dillon, R.A. Fleming, A.D. Karathanasis, 
and S.A. Shearer, 2005. Erosion probability maps: Calibrating precision 
agriculture data with soil surveys using logistic regression. 
Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 60(6): 462+. 

Munson, S.M., J. Belnap, and G.S. Okin, 2011. Responses of wind 
erosion to climate-induced vegetation changes on the Colorado 
Plateau. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
108(10): 3854-3859. 

Musick, J.T., O.R. Jones, B.A. Stewart, and D.A. Dusek, 1994. Wateryield 
relationships for irrigated and dryland wheat in the U.S. 
Southern Plains. Agron. J., 86(6): 980-986. 

Musser, F.R., and A.M. Shelton, 2005. The influence of post-exposure 
temperature on the toxicity of insecticides to Ostrinia nubilalis 
(lepidoptera: Crambidae). Pest Management Science, 61(5): 
508-510. 

NAS, 2007. Status of pollinators in North America. National Academy 
of Sciences, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. 

NASS, 2010. National Agricultural Statistical Service Web Page. 
http://www.nass.usda.gov/Data_and_Statistics/Quick_Stats/index. 
asp 

NASS, 2011. Small grains 2011 summary www.nass.usda.gov. 

Nayak, A., D. Marks, D.G. Chandler, and M. Seyfried, 2010. Longterm 
snow, climate, and streamflow trends at the Reynolds Creek 
Experimental Watershed, Owyhee Mountains, Idaho, United 
States. Water Resour. Res., 46(6): W06519. 

Nearing, M.A., 2001. Potential changes in rainfall erosivity in the U.S., 
with climate change during the 21st century. Journal of Soil and 
Water Conservation, 56(3): 229+. 

Nearing, M.A., L.D. Ascough, and J.M. Laflen, 1990. Sensitivity 
analysis of the WEPP hillslope profile erosion model. Transactions 
of the American Society of Agricultural Engineering, 33: 839-849. 

Nearing, M.A., V. Jetten, C. Baffaut, O. Cerdan, A. Couturier, M. 
Hernandez, Y. Le Bissonnais, M.H. Nichols, J.P. Nunes, C.S. 
Renschler, V. Souchre, and K. van Oost, 2005. Modeling response 
of soil erosion and runoff to changes in precipitation and cover. 
CATENA, 61(23): 131-154. 

Newman, J.A., 2006. Using the output from global circulation models 
to predict changes in the distribution and abundance of cereal 
aphids in Canada: A mechanistic modeling approach. Global 
Change Biology, 12(9): 1634-1642. 

Newman, Y.C., L.E. Sollenberger, K.J. Boote, L.H. Allen, J.C.V. Vu, 
and M.B. Hall, 2005. Temperature and carbon dioxide effects 
on nutritive value of rhizoma peanut herbage. Crop Sci., 45(1): 
316-321. 

Niu, S., R.A. Sherry, X. Zhou, S. Wan, and Y. Luo, 2010. Nitrogen 
regulation of the climatecarbon feedback: Evidence from a longterm 
global change experiment. Ecology, 91(11): 3261-3273. 

Nolan, T., J. Connolly, and M. Wachendorf, 2001. Mixed grazing and 
climatic determinants of white clover (Trifolium repens l.) content 
in a permanent pasture. Annals of Botany, 88(suppl 1): 713-724. 

Norby, R., T. Long, J. Hartz-Rubin, and E. ONeill, 2000. Nitrogen 
resorption in senescing tree leaves in a warmer, CO2-enriched 
atmosphere. Plant and Soil, 224(1): 15-29. 

Norby, R.J., S.D. Wullschleger, C.A. Gunderson, D.W. Johnson, and R. 
Ceulemans, 1999. Tree responses to rising CO2 in field experiments: 
Implications for the future forest. Plant, Cell & Environment, 
22(6): 683-714. 

Noy-Meir, I., 1973. Desert ecosystems: Environment and producers. 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 4(1): 25-51. 

NRC, 1981. Effect of environment on nutrient requirements of domestic 
animals. National Research Council, National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C. 

NRC, 1987. Predicting feed intake of food-producing animals. 
National Research Council, National Academy Press. 

NRC, 1996. Nutrient requirements of beef cattle. 7th edition. National 
Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 

Oerke, E.C., 2006. Crop losses to pests. Journal of Agricultural Science, 
144: 31-43. 

Ojima, D., L. Garcia, E. Elgaali, K. Miller, T.G.F. Kittel, and J. 
Lackett, 1999. Potential climate change impacts on water resources 
in the Great Plains 1. JAWRA Journal of the American Water 
Resources Association, 35(6): 1443-1454. 

Olien, W.C., and M.J. Bukovac, 1978. Effect of temperature on rate 
of ethylene evolution from ethephon and from ethephon-treated 
leaves of sour cherry. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural 
Science, 103(2): 199-202. 

Oliveira, S.K.L., L.C. Grangeiro, M.Z. Negreiros, B.S. de Souza, 
and S.R.R. de Souza, 2006. Lettuce cultivation with agrotextile 
protection under conditions of high temperatures and intensity of 
radiation. Caatinga, 19: 112-116. 

Olmstead, A.L., and P.W. Rhode, 2011. Adapting North American 
wheat production to climatic challenges, 18392009. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(2): 480-485. 

ONeal, M.R., M.A. Nearing, R.C. Vining, J. Southworth, and R.A. 
Pfeifer, 2005. Climate change impacts on soil erosion in midwest 
United States with changes in crop management. CATENA, 
61(23): 165-184. 

Ong, C.K., 1986. Proceedings of an international symposium, Agroclimatological 
Factors Affecting Phenology of Groundnut. 21-26 
Aug. 1985. ICRISAT Sahelian Center, Niamey, Niger. ICRISAT, 
Patancheru, A.P. 502 324, India. 

Onoda, Y., T. Hirose, and K. Hikosaka, 2009. Does leaf photosynthesis 
adapt to CO2-enriched environments? An experiment on plants 
originating from three natural CO2 springs. New Phytologist, 
182(3): 698-709. 

Oosterhuis, D.M., 1999. Yield response to environmental extremes in 
cotton, paper presented at 1999 Cotton Research Meeting, Report 
193. Arkansas Agric. Exp. Stn., Fayetteville, AR. 

Oosterhuis, D.M., 2002. Day or night high temperature: A major cause 
of yield variability. Cotton Grower, 46(89). 

Oosterhuis, D.M., F.M. Bourland, A.C. Bibi, E.D. Gonias, D. Loka, 
and D.K. Storch, 2009. Screening for temperature tolerance in 
cotton, in Summaries of cotton research in 2008, pp. 37-41. Univ. 
Arkansas Agric. Exp. Sta., Research Series. 

Oosterhuis, D.M., and J.L. Snider, 2011. High temperature stress on 
floral development and yield of cotton in D.M. Oosterhuis (ed.) 
Stress physiology in cotton. Cotton Foundation, Cordova, TN. 

Ortiz, R., K.D. Sayre, B. Govaerts, R. Gupta, G.V. Subbarao, T. Ban, 
D. Hodson, J.M. Dixon, J. Ivn Ortiz-Monasterio, and M. Reynolds, 
2008. Climate change: Can wheat beat the heat? Agriculture, 
Ecosystems & Environment, 126(12): 46-58. 

Osborne, C.P., J.L. Roche, R.L. Garcia, B.A. Kimball, G.W. Wall, P.J. 
Pinter, R.L.L. Morte, G.R. Hendrey, and S.P. Long, 1998. Does 
leaf position within a canopy affect acclimation of photosynthesis 
to elevated CO2? Plant Physiology, 117(3): 1037-1045. 

Ottman, M.J., B.A. Kimball, J.W. White, and G.W. Wall, 2012. Wheat 
growth response to increased temperature from varied planting 
dates and supplemental infrared heating. Agron. J., 104(1): 7-16. 

Pan, Q., Z. Wang, and B. Quebedeaux, 1998. Responses of the apple 
plant to CO2 enrichment: Changes in photosynthesis, sorbitol, other 
soluble sugars, and starch. Australian Journal of Plant Physiology, 
25(3): 293-297. 

Appendix A 


Paterson, A., Y.S. Saranga, M.M. Menz, C.X.J. Jiang, and R.W. Wright, 
2003. QTL analysis of genotype . environment interactions affecting 
cotton fiber quality. TAG Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
106(3): 384-396. 

Pearson, R.W., L.F. Ratliff, and H.M. Taylor, 1970. Effect of soil 
temperature, strength, and pH on cotton seedling root elongation. 
Agronomy Journal, 62(2): 243-246. 

Peet, M., S. Sato, and C.P. Clment, E, 2003. Heat stress increases 
sensitivity of pollen, fruit and seed production in tomatoes (Lycopersicon 
Esculentum Mill.) to non-optimal vapor pressure deficits. 
Acta Hort. (ISHS), 618: 209-215. 

Peet, M.M., and D.W. Wolfe., 2000. Crop ecosystem responses to 
climate change - vegetable crops, in K.R. Reddy and H.F. Hodges 
(eds.), Climate change and global crop productivity. CABI Pub., 
Wallingford, Oxon, UK; New York, NY. 

Pendall, E., Y.U.I. Osanai, A.L. Williams, and M.J. Hovenden, 2011. 
Soil carbon storage under simulated climate change is mediated by 
plant functional type. Global Change Biology, 17(1): 505-514. 

Peng, S., J. Huang, J.E. Sheehy, R.C. Laza, R.M. Visperas, X. Zhong, 
G.S. Centeno, G.S. Khush, and K.G. Cassman, 2004. Rice yields 
decline with higher night temperature from global warming. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101(27): 
9971-9975. 

Penuelas, J., S.B. Idso, A. Ribas, and B.A. Kimball, 1997. Effects of 
long-term atmospheric CO2 enrichment on the mineral concentration 
of citrus aurantium leaves. New Phytologist, 135(3): 439-444. 

Peralta, A., and M. Wander, 2008. Soil organic matter dynamics under 
soybean exposed to elevated CO2. Plant and Soil, 303(1): 69-81. 

Peri, P., and M. Bloomberg, 2002. Windbreaks in southern Patagonia, 
Argentina: A review of research on growth models, windspeed 
reduction, and effects on crops. Agroforestry Systems, 56(2): 
129-144. 

Perry, S.W., and D.R. Krieg, 1981. Gross net photosynthesis ratios of 
cotton as affected by environment and genotype, paper presented at 
Beltwide Cotton Producers Research Conference. Memphis, TN. 
National Cotton Council. 

Peterson, G., 2009. Ecological limits of adaptation to climate change, 
in W.N. Adger, I. Lorenzoni and K.L. OBrien (eds.), Adapting 
to climate change: Thresholds, values, governance. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge; New York. 

Peterson, G.L., 2009b. Reaction of selected winter wheat cultivars 
from Europe and United States to karnal bunt. European Journal of 
Plant Pathology, 125(3): 497-507. 

Pettigrew, W.T., 1995. Source-to-sink manipulation effects on cotton 
fiber quality. Agronomy Journal, 87(5): 947-952. 

Pettigrew, W.T., 2002. Improved yield potential with an early planting 
cotton production system. Agronomy Journal, 94(5): 997-1003. 

Pettigrew, W.T., 2004a. Moisture deficit effects on cotton lint yield, 
yield components, and boll distribution. Agronomy Journal, 96(2): 
377-383. 

Pettigrew, W.T., 2004b. Physiological consequences of moisture deficit 
stress in cotton. Crop Science, 44(4): 1265-1272. 

Pettigrew, W.T., 2008. The effect of higher temperatures on cotton lint 
yield production and fiber quality. Crop Science, 48(1): 278-285. 

Pfeifer, R.A., and M. Habeck, 2002. Farm level economic impacts of 
climate change, in O.C. Doering (ed.) Effects of climate change 
and variability on agricultural production systems, pp. 159178. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston. 

Pfeifer, R.A., J. Southworth, O.C. Doering, and L. Moore, 2002. Climate 
variability impacts on farm-level risk, in O.C. Doering (ed.) 
Effects of climate change and variability on agricultural production 
systems, pp. 179193. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston. 

Pigali, P., and S. Pandey, 2001. World maize needs meeting: Technological 
opportunities and priorities for the public sector, in P.L. 
Pingali (ed.) CIMMYT 1999-2000 world maize facts and trends, 
pp. 1-24. CIMMYT, Mexico. 

Pike, A.C., T.G. Mueller, A. Schrgendorfer, S.A. Shearer, and A.D. 
Karathanasis, 2009. Erosion index derived from terrain attributes 
using logistic regression and neural networks. Agronomy Journal, 
101(5): 1068-1079. 

Pino, M.d.l.A., E. Terry, and F. Soto, 2002. Natural shade systems as 
a phytoclimate modifier in tomato crop (lycopersicon esculentum 
mill). Cultivos Tropicale, 23: 5-10. 

Polley, H., P. Fay, V. Jin, and G. Combs, 2011. CO2 enrichment 
increases element concentrations in grass mixtures by changing 
species abundances. Plant Ecology, 212(6): 945-957. 

Polley, H.W., 1997. Implications of rising atmospheric carbon dioxide 
concentration for rangelands. Journal of Range Management, 
50(6): 562-577. 

Polley, H.W., J.A. Morgan, and P.A. Fay, 2011. Application of a conceptual 
framework to interpret variability in rangeland responses to 
atmospheric CO2 enrichment. The Journal of Agricultural Science, 
149(01): 1-14. 

Poorter, H., and M.-L. Navas, 2003. Plant growth and competition 
at elevated CO2: On winners, losers and functional groups. New 
Phytologist, 157(2): 175-198. 

Porter, J.R., and M. Gawith, 1999. Temperatures and the growth and 
development of wheat: A review. European Journal of Agronomy, 
10(1): 23-36. 

Postweiler, K., R. Stsser, and S.F. Anvari, 1985. The effect of different 
temperatures on the viability of ovules in cherries. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 25(3): 235-239. 

Poudel, P.R., R. Mochioka, K. Beppu, and I. Kataoka, 2009. Influence 
of temperature on berry composition of interspecific hybrid 
wine grape kadainou r-1 (Vitis ficifolia var. Ganebu x v. Vinifera 
muscat of alexandria). Journal of the Japanese Society for Horticultural 
Science, 78(2): 169-174. 

Powell, A.A., and G. David, 2011. Fruit crops. Principles of freeze 
protection for fruit crops. Alabama Cooperative Extension System 
http://www.aces.edu/dept/peaches/frzcritical.html. 

Power, A.G., 2010. Ecosystem services and agriculture: Tradeoffs 
and synergies. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 365(1554): 2959-2971. 

Prasad, P.V.V., K.J. Boote, and L.H. Allen Jr, 2006. Adverse high temperature 
effects on pollen viability, seed-set, seed yield and harvest 
index of grain-sorghum (Sorghum bicolor l. moench) are more 
severe at elevated carbon dioxide due to higher tissue temperatures. 
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 139(34): 237-251. 

Prasad, P.V.V., K.J. Boote, L.H. Allen, and J.M.G. Thomas, 2002. 
Effects of elevated temperature and carbon dioxide on seed-set 
and yield of kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris l.). Global Change 
Biology, 8(8): 710-721. 

Prasad, P.V.V., K.J. Boote, L. Hartwell Allen, and J.M.G. Thomas, 
2003. Super-optimal temperatures are detrimental to peanut 
(Arachis hypogaea L.) reproductive processes and yield at both 
ambient and elevated carbon dioxide. Global Change Biology, 
9(12): 1775-1787. 

Pressman, E., M.M. Peet, and D.M. Pharr, 2002. The effect of heat 
stress on tomato pollen characteristics is associated with changes 
in carbohydrate concentration in the developing anthers. Annals of 
Botany, 90(5): 631-636. 

Prior, S.A., H.A. Torbert, G.B. Runion, G.L. Mullins, H.H. Rogers, and 
J.R. Mauney, 1998. Effects of carbon dioxide enrichment on cotton 
nutrient dynamics. Journal of Plant Nutrition, 21(7): 1407-1426. 

Appendix A 


Pruski, F.F., and M.A. Nearing, 2002a. Runoff and soil-loss responses 
to changes in precipitation: A computer simulation study. Journal 
of Soil and Water Conservation, 57(1): 7-16. 

Pruski, F.F., and M.A. Nearing, 2002b. Climate-induced changes in 
erosion during the 21st century for eight U.S. locations. Water 
Resour. Res., 38(12): 1298. 

Pryor, S.C., R.J. Barthelmie, D.T. Young, E.S. Takle, R.W. Arritt, D. 
Flory, W.J. Gutowski, Jr., A. Nunes, and J. Roads, 2009. Wind 
speed trends over the contiguous United States. J. Geophys. Res., 
114(D14): D14105. 

Quine, T.A., and Y. Zhang, 2002. An investigation of spatial variation 
in soil erosion, soil properties, and crop production within an 
agricultural field in Devon, United Kingdom. Journal of Soil and 
Water Conservation, 57(1): 55-65. 

Raj, P.P., M. Ryosuke, B. Kenji, and K. Ikuo, 2009. Influence of temperature 
on berry composition of interspecific hybrid wine grape 
kadainou r-1 (Vitis ficifolia var. Ganebu.v. Vinifera muscat of 
alexandria). Journal of the Japanese Society for Horticultural 
Science, 78(2): 169-174. 

Ramey, H.H., 1986. Stress influence on fiber development, in J.R. 
Mauney and J.M. Stewart (eds.), Cotton physiology, pp. 351-360. 
Cotton Foundation, Memphis, TN. 

Rashidi, M., and M. Gholami, 2008. Review of crop water productivity 
values for tomato, potato, melon, watermelon and cantaloupe 
in Iran. International Journal of Agriculture and Biology, 10: 
432-436. 

Ravi, S., P. DOdorico, D.D. Breshears, J.P. Field, A.S. Goudie, T.E. 
Huxman, J. Li, G.S. Okin, R.J. Swap, A.D. Thomas, S. Van Pelt, 
J.J. Whicker, and T.M. Zobeck, 2011. Aeolian processes and the 
biosphere. Rev. Geophys., 49(3): RG3001. 

Reckendorf, F., 1995. RCA III, sedimentation in irrigation water 
bodies, reservoirs, canals, and ditches. USDA - Natural Resources 
Conservation Service http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/ 
detail/national/technical/nra/rca/?&cid=nrcs143_014200. 

Reddy, K.R., G.H. Davidonis, A.S. Johnson, and B.T. Vinyard, 1999. 
Temperature regime and carbon dioxide enrichment alter cotton 
boll development and fiber properties. Agronomy Journal, 91(5): 
851-858. 

Reddy, K.R., H.F. Hodges, and J.M. McKinion, 1995. Carbon dioxide 
and temperature effects on pima cotton development. Agronomy 
Journal, 87(5): 820-826. 

Reddy, K.R., H.F. Hodges, and J.M. McKinion, 1997. A comparison of 
scenarios for the effect of global climate change on cotton growth 
and yield. Australian Journal of Plant Physiology, 24: 707-713. 

Reddy, K.R., H.F. Hodges, J.M. McKinion, and G.W. Wall, 1992a. 
Temperature effects on pima cotton growth and development. 
Agron. J., 84(2): 237-243. 

Reddy, K.R., H.F. Hodges, and V.R. Reddy, 1992. Temperature effects 
on cotton fruit retention. Agronomy Journal, 84(1): 26-30. 

Reddy, K.R., H.F. Hodges, and V.R. Reddy, 1992b. Temperature effects 
on cotton fruit retention. Agron. J., 84(1): 26-30. 

Reddy, K.R., V.R. Reddy, and H.F. Hodges, 1992. Temperature effects 
on early season cotton growth and development. Agronomy Journal, 
84(2): 229-237. 

Reddy, K.R., P.V. Vara Prasad, and V.G. Kakani, 2005. Crop responses 
to elevated carbon dioxide and interactions with temperature. 
Journal of Crop Improvement, 13(1-2): 157-191. 

Reddy, V.R., D.N. Baker, and H.F. Hodges, 1991. Temperature 
effects on cotton canopy growth, photosynthesis, and respiration. 
Agronomy Journal, 83(4): 699-704. 

Reddy, V.R., H.F. Hodges, W.H. McCarty, and J.M. McKinnon, 1996. 
Weather and cotton growth: Present and future. Mississippi Agr. & 
Forestry Exp. Sta., Mississippi State University, Starkeville, MS. 

Reddy, V.R., K.R. Reddy, and H.F. Hodges, 1995. Carbon dioxide 
enrichment and temperature effects on cotton canopy photosynthesis, 
transpiration, and water-use efficiency. Field Crops Research, 
41(1): 13-23. 

Reddy, V.R., K.R. Reddy, and H.F. Hodges, 1995. Carbon dioxide 
enrichment and temperature effects on cotton canopy photosynthesis, 
transpiration, and water-use efficiency. Field Crops Research, 
41(1): 13-23. 

Redman, R.S., Y.O. Kim, C.J.D.A. Woodward, C. Greer, L. Espino, 
S.L. Doty, and R.J. Rodriguez, 2011. Increased fitness of rice 
plants to abiotic stress via habitat adapted symbiosis: A strategy for 
mitigating impacts of climate change. PLoS ONE, 6(7): e14823. 

Reginato, G.H., R.H. Callejas, R.A. Sapian, and V. Garca-de-Cortzar, 
2010. Rest completion and growth of Thompson seedless 
grapes as a function of temperatures. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 872: 
427-430. 

Reich, P.B., B.A. Hungate, and Y.Q. Luo, 2006. Carbon-nitrogen 
interactions in terrestrial ecosystems in response to rising atmospheric 
carbon dioxide, in Annual review of ecology evolution and 
systematics, pp. 611-636. Annual Reviews, Palo Alto. 

Reich, P.B., D. Tilman, J. Craine, D. Ellsworth, M.G. Tjoelker, J. 
Knops, D. Wedin, S. Naeem, D. Bahauddin, J. Goth, W. Bengtson, 
and T.D. Lee, 2001. Do species and functional groups differ in 
acquisition and use of C, N and water under varying atmospheric 
CO2 and N availability regimes? A field test with 16 grassland species. 
New Phytologist, 150(2): 435-448. 

Reicosky, D.C., 1997. Tillage-induced CO2 emission from soil. Nutrient 
Cycling in Agroecosystems, 49(1): 273-285. 

Rhoads, M.L., R.P. Rhoads, M.J. VanBaale, R.J. Collier, S.R. Sanders, 
W.J. Weber, B.A. Crooker, and L.H. Baumgard, 2009. Effects of 
heat stress and plane of nutrition on lactating Holstein cows: I. 
Production, metabolism, and aspects of circulating somatotropin1. 
Journal of dairy science, 92(5): 1986-1997. 

Richardson, D.M., J.J. Hellmann, J.S. McLachlan, D.F. Sax, M.W. 
Schwartz, P. Gonzalez, E.J. Brennan, A. Camacho, T.L. Root, 
O.E. Sala, S.H. Schneider, D.M. Ashe, J.R. Clark, R. Early, J.R. 
Etterson, E.D. Fielder, J.L. Gill, B.A. Minteer, S. Polasky, H.D. 
Safford, A.R. Thompson, and M. Vellend, 2009. Multidimensional 
evaluation of managed relocation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 106(24): 9721-9724. 

Ro, H.M., P.G. Kim, I.B. Lee, M.S. Yiem, and S.Y. Woo, 2001. 
Photosynthetic characteristics and growth responses of dwarf 
apple (Malus domestica borkh. Cv. Fuji) saplings after 3 years of 
exposure to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration and 
temperature. Trees-Structure and Function, 15(4): 195-203. 

Roberts, P., 2008. The end of food. Houghton Mifflin Company, 
Boston. 

Robertson, T., J. Zak, and D. Tissue, 2010. Precipitation magnitude and 
timing differentially affect species richness and plant density in 
the Sotol grassland of the Chihuahuan desert. Oecologia, 162(1): 
185-197. 

Root, T.L., J.T. Price, K.R. Hall, S.H. Schneider, C. Rosenzweig, and 
J.A. Pounds, 2003. Fingerprints of global warming on wild animals 
and plants. Nature, 421(6918): 57-60. 

Rosegrant, M., M. Sombilla, and N. Perez, 1995. Food, agriculture 
and the environment: Discussion paper no. 5, 1-34 pp. International 
Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C. 

Rosenzweig, C., and D. Hillel, 1998. Climate change and the global 
harvest: Potential impacts of the greenhouse effect on agriculture. 
Oxford University Press, New York. 

Rosenzweig, C., J. Phillips, R. Goldberg, J. Carroll, and T. Hodges, 
1996. Potential impacts of climate change on citrus and potato 
production in the U.S. Agricultural Systems, 52(4): 455-479. 

Appendix A 


Rtter, R., and S.C. van de Geijn, 1999. Climate change effects on 
plant growth, crop yield and livestock. Climatic Change, 43(4): 
651-681. 

Rouse, R.E., and W.B. Sherman, 2002. High night temperatures during 
bloom affect fruit set in peach. Proc. FL State Hort. Soc, 115: 
96-97. 

Sacks, W.J., and C.J. Kucharik, 2011. Crop management and phenology 
trends in the U.S. corn belt: Impacts on yields, evapotranspiration 
and energy balance. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 
151(7): 882-894. 

Saini, H.S., and D. Aspinall, 1982. Abnormal sporogenesis in wheat 
(Triticum-aestivum l) induced by short periods of high-temperature. 
Annals of Botany, 49(6): 835-846. 

Sala, O.E., W.J. Parton, L.A. Joyce, and W.K. Lauenroth, 1988. 
Primary production of the central grassland region of the United 
States. Ecology, 69(1): 40-45. 

Sanderson, M.A., D. Wedin, and B. Tracy, 2009. Grassland: Definition, 
origins, extent and future, in W.F. Wedin and S.L. Fales (eds.), 
Grassland : Quietness and strength for a new American agriculture, 
pp. 57-74. American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science 
Society of America, Soil Society of America, Madison, WI. 

Sankey, J.B., M.J. Germino, S.G. Benner, N.F. Glenn, and A.N. 
Hoover, 2012. Transport of biologically important nutrients by 
wind in an eroding cold desert. Aeolian Research(0). 

Santos, C.L.d., J. Seabra, S., J.G. de Lalla, V.C.d.A. Theodoro, and A. 
Nespoli, 2009. Performance of crispi lettuce cultivars under high 
temperatures in Cceres-MT. Revista Agrarian, 2: 87-98. 

Sanzol, J., and M. Herrero, 2001. The effective pollination period in 
fruit trees. Scientia Horticulturae, 90(12): 1-17. 

Saranga, Y., C.X. Jiang, R.J. Wright, D. Yakir, and A.H. Paterson, 
2004. Genetic dissection of cotton physiological responses to arid 
conditions and their inter-relationships with productivity. Plant, 
Cell & Environment, 27(3): 263-277. 

Satake, T., 1995. High temperature injury, in T. Matsuo (ed.) Science 
of the rice plant. Food and Agriculture Policy Research Center, 
Tokyo. 

Satake, T., and H. Hayase, 1970. Male sterility caused by cooling treatment 
at the young microspore stage in rice plants. 5. Estimations of 
pollen development stage and the most sensitive stage to coolness. 
Proceedings of the Crop Science Society of Japan, 39: 468-473. 

Satake, T., and S. Yoshida, 1976. High temperature-induced sterility 
in indica ice at flowering. Japanese Journal of Crop Science, 47: 
4-17. 

Sato, S., 2006. The effects of moderately elevated temperature stress 
due to global warming on the yield and the male reproductive 
development of tomato (lycopersicon esculentum mill.). HortResearch, 
60: 85-89. 

Sato, S., M.M. Peet, and R.G. Gardner, 2004. Altered flower retention 
and developmental patterns in nine tomato cultivars under elevated 
temperature. Scientia Horticulturae, 101(12): 95-101. 

Sato, S., M.M. Peet, and J.F. Thomas, 2000. Physiological factors limit 
fruit set of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) under chronic, 
mild heat stress. Plant, Cell & Environment, 23(7): 719-726. 

Schillinger, W.F., 2001. Reducing water runoff and erosion from frozen 
agricultural soils, paper presented at Soil Erosion Research for 
the 21st Century: Proceedings of the International Symposium, 
3-5 January, 2001. American Society of Agricultural Engineers, 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 2001. 

Schillinger, W.F., S.E. Schofstoll, and J.R. Alldredge, 2008. Available 
water and wheat grain yield relations in a Mediterranean climate. 
Field Crops Research, 109(1-3): 45-49. 

Schumacher, J.A., T.C. Kaspar, J.C. Ritchie, T.E. Schumacher, D.L. 
Karlen, E.R. Venteris, G.W. McCarty, T.S. Colvin, D.B. Jaynes, 
M.J. Lindstrom, and T.E. Fenton, 2005. Identifying spatial patterns 
of erosion for use in precision conservation. Journal of Soil and 
Water Conservation, 60(6): 355-362. 

Scott, H.D., J.A. Ferguson, L. Hanson, T. Fugitt, and E. Smith, 1998. 
Agricultural water management in the Mississippi Delta region of 
Arkansas. Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 959, 
http://arkansasagnews.uark.edu/1353.htm. 

Seager, R., and G.A. Vecchi, 2010. Greenhouse warming and the 21st 
century hydroclimate of southwestern North America. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(50): 21277-21282. 

Segal, M., Z. Pan, R.W. Arritt, and E.S. Takle, 2001. On the potential 
change in wind power over the U.S. due to increases of atmospheric 
greenhouse gases. Renewable Energy, 24(2): 235-243. 

Seif, S., and W. Gruppe, 1985. Chilling requirements of sweet cherries 
(Prunus avium) and interspecific cherry hybrids (Prunus x ssp.). 
Acta Hort. (ISHS), 169(289-294). 

Seo, S.N., and B. McCarl, 2011. Managing livestock species under 
climate change in Australia. Animals, 1(4): 343-365. 

Serrat-Capdevila, A., J.B. Valds, J.G. Prez, K. Baird, L.J. Mata, and 
T. Maddock Iii, 2007. Modeling climate change impacts  and 
uncertainty  on the hydrology of a riparian system: The San Pedro 
basin (Arizona/Sonora). Journal of Hydrology, 347(12): 48-66. 

Shah, F., J. Huang, K. Cui, L. Nie, T. Shah, C. Chen, and K. Wang, 
2011. Impact of high-temperature stress on rice plant and its traits 
related to tolerance. The Journal of Agricultural Science, 149(05): 
545-556. 

Shaw, M.R., E.S. Zavaleta, N.R. Chiariello, E.E. Cleland, H.A. 
Mooney, and C.B. Field, 2002. Grassland responses to global 
environmental changes suppressed by elevated CO2. Science, 
298(5600): 1987-1990. 

Sherry, R.A., X. Zhou, S. Gu, J.A. Arnone, D.S. Schimel, P.S. Verburg, 
L.L. Wallace, and Y. Luo, 2007. Divergence of reproductive 
phenology under climate warming. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 104(1): 198-202. 

Shipitalo, M.J., and L.B. Owens, 2006. Tillage system, application 
rate, and extreme event effects on herbicide losses in surface 
runoff. J. Environ. Qual., 35(6): 2186-2194. 

Singh, R.P., P.V.V. Prasad, K. Sunita, S.N. Giri, and K.R. Reddy, 2007. 
Influence of high temperature and breeding for heat tolerance in 
cotton: A review, in L.S. Donald (ed.) Advances in agronomy, pp. 
313-385. Academic Press. 

Skidmore, E.L., 1965. Assessing wind erosion forces: Directions and 
relative magnitudes. Soil Science Society of America Proceedings, 
29(5): 587-590. 

Skidmore, E.L., P.S. Fisher, and N.P. Woodruff, 1970. Wind erosion 
equation: Computer solution and application. Soil Science Society 
of America Journal, 34(6): 931-935. 

Snider, J.L., D.M. Oosterhuis, and E.M. Kawakami, 2010. Genotypic 
differences in thermotolerance are dependent upon prestress capacity 
for antioxidant protection of the photosynthetic apparatus in 
Gossypium hirsutum. Physiologia Plantarum, 138(3): 268-277. 

Snider, J.L., D.M. Oosterhuis, and E.M. Kawakami, 2011. Diurnal 
pollen tube growth rate is slowed by high temperature in fieldgrown 
Gossypium hirsutum pistils. Journal of Plant Physiology, 
168(5): 441-448. 

Snider, J.L., D.M. Oosterhuis, and E.M. Kawakami, 2011. Mechanisms 
of reproductive thermotolerance in Gossypium hirsutum: The 
effect of genotype and exogenous calcium application. Journal of 
Agronomy & Crop Science, 197(3): 228-236. 

Snider, J.L., D.M. Oosterhuis, B.W. Skulman, and E.M. Kawakami, 
2009. Heat stress-induced limitations to reproductive success in 
Gossypium hirsutum. Physiologia Plantarum, 137(2): 125-138. 

Appendix A 


Snyder, R.L.a.J.P.d.M.-A., 2005. Frost protection: Fundamentals, 
practice, and economics. Environment and Natural Resource 
Series 10. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, Rome. 

Sojka, R.E., D.L. Bjorneberg, T.J. Trout, T.S. Strelkoff, and M.A. 
Nearing, 2007. The importance and challenge of modeling 
irrigation-induced erosion. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 
62(3): 153-162. 

Snsteby, A., and O.M. Heide, 2008. Temperature responses, flowering 
and fruit yield of the June-bearing strawberry cultivars florence, 
frida and korona. Scientia Horticulturae, 119(1): 49-54. 

Sorensen, R.B., C.L. Butts, and R.C. Nutti, 2011. Deep subsurface drip 
irrigation for cotton in the Southeast. Journal of Cotton Science, 
15: 233-242. 

Southworth, J., R.A. Pfeifer, M. Habeck, J.C. Randolph, O.C. Doering, 
J.J. Johnston, and D.G. Rao, 2002. Changes in soybean yields in 
the midwestern United States as a result of future changes in climate, 
climate variability, and CO2 fertilization. Climatic Change, 
53(4): 447-475. 

Southworth, J., J.C. Randolph, M. Habeck, O.C. Doering, R.A. Pfeifer, 
D.G. Rao, and J.J. Johnston, 2000. Consequences of future climate 
change and changing climate variability on maize yields in the 
midwestern United States. Agriculture, Ecosystems, and Environment, 
82(13): 139-158. 

Spayd, S.E., J.M. Tarara, D.L. Mee, and J.C. Ferguson, 2002. Separation 
of sunlight and temperature effects on the composition of 
Vitis vinifera cv. Merlot berries. American Journal of Enology and 
Viticulture, 53(3): 171-182. 

Sprott, L.R., G.E. Selk, and D.C. Adams, 2001. Review: Factors affecting 
decisions on when to calve beef females. The Professional 
Animal Scientist, 17(4): 238-246. 

Srinivasan, C., A.M. Callahan, C. Dardick, and R. Scorza, 2010. 
Expression of the poplar flowering locus T1 (FT1) gene reduces 
the generation time in plum (Prunus domestica l.), Lisbon, 
Portugal. 

Srinivasan, C., and M.G. Mullins, 1981. Physiology of flowering in the 
grapevine  a review. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture, 
32(1): 47-63. 

Stanton, M.A., J.C. Scheerens, R.C. Funt, and J.R. Clark, 2007. Floral 
competence of primocane-fruiting blackberries prime-jan and 
prime-jim grown at three temperature regimens. HortScience, 
42(3): 508-513. 

Stckle, C., R. Nelson, S. Higgins, J. Brunner, G. Grove, R. Boydston, 
M. Whiting, and C. Kruger, 2010. Assessment of climate change 
impact on eastern Washington agriculture. Climatic Change, 
102(1): 77-102. 

Stockton, J.R., L.D. Doneen, and V.T. Walhood, 1961. Boll shedding 
and growth of the cotton plant in relation to irrigation frequency. 
Agronomy Journal, 53(4): 272-275. 

Stone, L.R., and A.J. Schlegel, 2006. Yieldwater supply relationships 
of grain sorghum and winter wheat. Agron. J., 98(5): 1359-1366. 

Stott, G.H., 1981. What is animal stress and how is it measured? Journal 
of Animal Science, 52(1): 150-153. 

Stover, E.W., and D.W. Greene, 2005. Environmental effects on the 
performance of foliar applied plant growth regulators: A review 
focusing on tree fruits. HortTechnology, 15(2): 214-221. 

St-Pierre, N.R., B. Cobanov, and G. Schnitkey, 2003. Economic losses 
from heat stress by U.S. livestock industries. Journal of Dairy 
Science, 86: E52-E77. 

Sun, Y.-C., J. Yin, F.-J. Chen, G. Wu, and F. Ge, 2011. How does atmospheric 
elevated CO2 affect crop pests and their natural enemies? 
Case histories from China. Insect Science, 18(4): 393-400. 

Sutherst, R., R. Baker, S. Coakley, R. Harrington, D. Kriticos, and H. 
Scherm, 2007. Pests under global changemeeting your future 
landlords? in J.G. Canadell, D.E. Pataki and L. Pitelka (eds.), 
Terrestrial ecosystems in a changing world. Springer, Berlin; New 
York. 

Suttle, K.B., M.A. Thomsen, and M.E. Power, 2007. Species interactions 
reverse grassland responses to changing climate. Science, 
315(5812): 640-642. 

Swartz, H.J., and L.E. Powell Jr, 1981. The effect of long chilling 
requirement on time of bud break in apple. Acta Hort. (ISHS), 120: 
173-178. 

Syvertsen, J., and J. Graham, 1999. Phosphorus supply and arbuscular 
mycorrhizas increase growth and net gas exchange responses of 
two citrus spp. grown at elevated CO2. Plant and Soil, 208(2): 
209-219. 

Taha, M.A., M.N.A. Malik, F.I. Chaudhry , and M.I. Makhdum, 1981. 
Heat-induced sterility in cotton sown during early April in West 
Punjab. Experimental Agriculture, 17(02): 189-194. 

Takeda, F., and J. Phillips, 2011. Horizontal cane orientation and 
rowcover application improve winter survival and yield of trailing 
siskiyou blackberry. HortTechnology, 21(2): 170-175. 

Tartachnyk, I.I., and M.M. Blanke, 2007. Photosynthesis and transpiration 
of tomato and CO2 fluxes in a greenhouse under changing 
environmental conditions in winter. Annals of Applied Biology, 
150(2): 149-156. 

Tashiro, T., and I. Wardlaw, 1990. The response to high temperature 
shock and humidity changes prior to and during the early stages 
of grain development in wheat. Functional Plant Biology, 17(5): 
551-561. 

Tesfaendrias, M.T., M.R. McDonald, and J. Warland, 2010. Consistency 
of long-term marketable yield of carrot and onion cultivars 
in muck (organic) soil in relation to seasonal weather. Canadian 
Journal of Plant Science, 90(5): 755-765. 

Tew, M., G. Battel, and C.A. Nelson., 2002. Implementation of a new 
wind chill temperature index by the National Weather Service. 
American Meteorology Society, Orlando, FL. 

Thakur, P., S. Kumar, J.A. Malik, J.D. Berger, and H. Nayyar, 2010. 
Cold stress effects on reproductive development in grain crops: 
An overview. Environmental and Experimental Botany, 67(3): 
429-443. 

Thornton, P.K., 2010. Livestock production: Recent trends, future 
prospects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 365(1554): 2853-2867. 

Tian, X., T. Matsui, S. Li, M. Yoshimoto, K. Kobayasi, and T. 
Hasegawa, 2010. Heat-induced floret sterility of hybrid rice (Oryza 
sativa) cultivars under humid and low wind conditions in the 
field of Jianghan Basin, China. Plant Production Science, 13(3): 
243-251. 

Timlin, D., S.M. Lutfor Rahman, J. Baker, V.R. Reddy, D. Fleisher, and 
B. Quebedeaux, 2006. Whole plant photosynthesis, development, 
and carbon partitioning in potato as a function of temperature. 
Agronomy Journal, 98(5): 1195-1203. 

Tomer, M.D., 2010. How do we identify opportunities to apply new 
knowledge and improve conservation effectiveness? Journal of 
Soil and Water Conservation, 65(4): 261-265. 

Torell, L.A., S. Murugan, and O.A. Ramirez, 2010. Economics of flexible 
versus conservative stocking strategies to manage climate variability 
risk. Rangeland Ecology & Management, 63(4): 415-425. 

Tromp, J., 1976. Flower-bud formation and shoot growth in apple as 
affected by temperature. Scientia Horticulturae, 5(4): 331-338. 

Tromp, J., and O. Borsboom, 1994. The effect of autumn and spring 
temperature on fruit set and the effective pollination period in 
apple and pear. Scientia Horticulturae, 60: 23-30. 

Appendix A 


Tsvetsinskaya, E.A., L.O. Mearns, T. Mavromatis, W. Gao, L. 
McDaniel, and M.W. Downton, 2003. The effect of spatial scale of 
climatic change scenarios on simulated maize, winter wheat, and 
rice production in the southeastern United States. Climatic Change, 
60(1-2): 37-71. 

Tubiello, F.N., C. Rosenzweig, R.A. Goldberg, S. Jagtap, and J.W. 
Jones, 2002. Effects of climate change on U.S. crop production: 
Simulation results using two different GCM scenarios. Part 
I: Wheat, potato, maize, and citrus. Climate Research, 20(3): 
259-270. 

Turner, N.C., A.B. Hearn, J.E. Begg, and G.A. Constable, 1986. 
Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum l.): Physiological and morphological 
responses to water deficits and their relationship to yield. Field 
Crops Research, 14(0): 153-170. 

Tylianakis, J.M., R.K. Didham, J. Bascompte, and D.A. Wardle, 2008. 
Global change and species interactions in terrestrial ecosystems. 
Ecology Letters, 11(12): 1351-1363. 

U.S. Corps of Army Engineers, 2000. Grand Prairie area demonstration 
project. Http://www.Mvm.Usace.Army.Mil/grandprairie/. 

US EPA, 2010. Climate change indicators in the United States. EPA 
430r10007 www.epa.gov/climatechange/science/indicators/. 

USDA, 1956. Notes of the joint conference on slope-practice. USDA 
Soil and Water Conservation Research Branch, Agricultural 
Research Service and Soil Conservation Service, Purdue University, 
Feb. 27-March 1, 1956. 

USDA, 1990-2010. Agricultural statistics. United States Government 
Printing Office, United States Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, DC. 

USDA, 2008. The synthesis and assessment product 4.3 (SAP 4.3): 
The effects of climate change on agriculture, land resources, water 
resources, and biodiversity in the United States. 

USDA, 2010. 2007 national resources inventory  soil erosion on 
croplands. Natural Resources Conservation Service http://www. 
nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/nrcs143_012269.pdf. 

Uzun, S., 2007. The effect of temperature and mean cumulative daily 
light intensity on fruiting behavior of greenhouse-grown tomato. 
Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science, 132(4): 
459-466. 

Van Klaveren, R.W., and D.K. McCool, 2010. Freezethaw and water 
tension effects on soil detachment. Soil Science Society of America 
Journal, 74(4): 1327-1338. 

Vicens, N., and J. Bosch, 2000. Weather-dependent pollinator activity 
in an apple orchard, with special reference to Osmia cornuta and 
Apis mellifera (hymenoptera: Megachilidae and apidae). Environmental 
Entomology, 29(3): 413-420. 

Vidon, P., 2010. Riparian zone management and environmental quality: 
A multi-contaminant challenge. Hydrological Processes, 24(11): 
1532-1535. 

Villafae, R., and R. Hernndez, 2000. Relationship between furrow 
orientation and the distribution of moisture and salinity in top soil. 
Agronoma Tropical (Maracay), 50: 665-673. 

Vu, J.C.V., Y.C. Newman, L.H. Allen Jr, M. Gallo-Meagher, and M.-Q. 
Zhang, 2002. Photosynthetic acclimation of young sweet orange 
trees to elevated growth CO2 and temperature. Journal of Plant 
Physiology, 159(2): 147-157. 

Wagstaffe, A., and N.H. Battey, 2004. Analysis of shade and temperature 
effects on assimilate partitioning in the everbearing strawberry 
everest as the basis for optimised long-season fruit production. 
Journal of Horticultural Science & Biotechnology, 79(6): 917-922. 

Wagstaffe, A., and N.H. Battey, 2006. The optimum temperature for 
long-season cropping in the everbearing strawberry everest. . 
Acta Hort. (ISHS), 708: 45-50. 

Wand, S.J.E., G.F. Midgley, M.H. Jones, and P.S. Curtis, 1999. 
Responses of wild C4 and C3 grass (poaceae) species to elevated 
atmospheric CO2 concentration: A meta-analytic test of current 
theories and perceptions. Global Change Biology, 5(6): 723-741. 

Wanjura, D.F., E.B. Hudspeth, and J.D. Bilbro, 1969. Emergence time, 
seed quality, and planting depth effects on yield and survival of 
cotton (Gossypium hirsutum l.). Agronomy Journal, 61(1): 63-65. 

Warrington, I.J., T.A. Fulton, E.A. Halligan, and H.N. de Silva, 1999. 
Apple fruit growth and maturity are affected by early season 
temperatures. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural 
Science, 124(5): 468-477. 

Wassmann, R., S.V.K. Jagadish, K. Sumfleth, H. Pathak, G. Howell, 
A. Ismail, R. Serraj, E. Redona, R.K. Singh, and S. Heuer, 2009. 
Regional vulnerability of climate change impacts on Asian rice 
production and scope for adaptation, in D.L. Sparks (ed.) Advances 
in agronomy, vol 102, pp. 91-133. 

Way, R.D., 1995. Pollination and fruit set of fruit crops. Cornell Cooperative 
Extension. Infor. Bul. 237. 

Weinberger, J.H., 1954. Effects of high temperatures during the 
breaking of the rest of Sullivan Elberta peach buds. Journal of the 
American Society for Horticultural Science, 63: 157-162. 

Welch, J.R., J.R. Vincent, M. Auffhammer, P.F. Moya, A. Dobermann, 
and D. Dawe, 2010. Rice yields in tropical/subtropical Asia 
exhibit large but opposing sensitivities to minimum and maximum 
temperatures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
107(33): 14562-14567. 

Weltz, M.A., G. Dunn, J. Reeder, and G. Frasier, 2003. Ecological 
sustainability of rangelands. Arid Land Research and Management, 
17(4): 369-388. 

Weltz, M.A., L. Jolley, D. Goodrich, K. Boykin, M. Nearing, J. Stone, 
P. Guertin, M. Hernandez, K. Spaeth, F. Pierson, C. Morris, and 
B. Kepner, 2011. Techniques for assessing the environmental outcomes 
of conservation practices applied to rangeland watersheds. 
Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 66(5): 154A-162A. 

Wert, T.W., J.G. Williamson, J.X. Chaparro, E.P. Miller, and R.E. 
Rouse, 2009. The influence of climate on fruit development and 
quality of four low-chill peach cultivars. HortScience, 44(3): 
666-670. 

Wertheim, S.J., 2000. Developments in the chemical thinning of apple 
and pear. Plant Growth Regulation, 31(1): 85-100. 

Wheeler, T.R., G.R. Batts, R.H. Ellis, P. Hadley, and J.I.L. Morison, 
1996. Growth and yield of winter wheat (Triticum aestivum) crops 
in response to CO2 and temperature. The Journal of Agricultural 
Science, 127(01): 37-48. 

Wheeler, T.R., A.J. Daymond, J.I.L. Morison, R.H. Ellis, and P. 
Hadley, 2004. Acclimation of photosynthesis to elevated CO2 in 
onion (Allium cepa) grown at a range of temperatures. Annals of 
Applied Biology, 144(1): 103-111. 

White, J.W., G. Hoogenboom, B.A. Kimball, and G.W. Wall, 2011. 
Methodologies for simulating impacts of climate change on crop 
production. Field Crops Research, 124(3): 357-368. 

White, M.A., N.S. Diffenbaugh, G.V. Jones, J.S. Pal, and F. Giorgi, 
2006. Extreme heat reduces and shifts United States premium 
wine production in the 21st century. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 103(30): 11217-11222. 

Whitford, W.G., and Y. Steinberger, 2011. Effects of simulated storm 
sizes and nitrogen on three Chihuahuan desert perennial herbs and 
a grass. Journal of Arid Environments, 75(9): 861-864. 

Wiatrak, P.J., D.L. Wright, and J.J. Marois, 2006. Development and 
yields of cotton under two tillage systems and nitrogen application 
following white lupin grain crop. Journal of Cotton Science, 10: 
1-8. 

Appendix A 


Wiatrak, P.J., D.L. Wright, J.J. Marois, W. Koziara, and J.A. Pudelko, 
2005. Tillage and nitrogen application impact on cotton following 
wheat. Agronomy Journal, 97(1): 288-293. 

Wilkie, J.D., M. Sedgley, and T. Olesen, 2008. Regulation of floral 
initiation in horticultural trees. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
59(12): 3215-3228. 

Wilks, D.S., and D.W. Wolfe, 1998. Optimal use and economic value 
of weather forecasts for lettuce irrigation in a humid climate. Agricultural 
and Forest Meteorology, 89(2): 115-129. 

Williams, J., M. Nearing, A. Nicks, E. Skidmore, C. Valentin, K. King, 
and R. Savabi, 1996. Using soil erosion models for global change 
studies. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, 51(5): 381-385. 

Williams, J.H., J.H.H. Wilson, and G.C. Bate., 1975. The growth 
of groundnuts (Arachis hypogaea L. Cv. Makulu red) at three 
altitudes in Rhodesia. Rhodesian Journal of Agricultural Research, 
13: 33-43. 

Williams, R.S., R.J. Norby, and D.E. Lincoln, 2000. Effects of elevated 
CO2 and temperature-grown red and sugar maple on gypsy moth 
performance. Global Change Biology, 6(6): 685-695. 

Wilson, B.C., J.L. Sibley, J.E. Altland, E.H. Simonne, and D.J. Eakes, 
2002. Chill and heat unit levels affect foliar budbreak of selected 
red and Freeman maple cultivars. Arboriculture & Urban Forestry 
Online, 28: 148-152. 

Wischmeier, W.H., 1959. A rainfall erosion index for a universal soilloss 
equation. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 23(3): 246-249. 

Wischmeier, W.H., and D.D. Smith, 1965. Predicting rainfall-erosion 
losses from cropland east of the Rocky Mountains : Guide for 
selection of practices for soil and water conservation. Agricultural 
Research Service, U.S. Dept of Agriculture in cooperation with 
Purdue Agricultural Experiment Station, Washington, D.C. 

Wischmeier, W.H., and D.D. Smith, 1978. Predicting rainfall erosion 
losses : A guide to conservation planning. Dept. of Agriculture, 
Science and Education Administration, Washington, D.C. 

Wisniewski, M., J. Norelli, C. Bassett, T. Artlip, and D. Macarisin, 
2011. Ectopic expression of a novel peach (Prunus persica) 
CBF transcription factor in apple (Malus . domestica ) results in 
short-day induced dormancy and increased cold hardiness. Planta, 
233(5): 971-983. 

Wissemeier, A.H., and G. Zuhlke, 2002. Relation between climatic 
variables, growth and the incidence of tipburn in field-grown 
lettuce as evaluated by simple, partial and multiple regression 
analysis. Scientia Horticulturae, 93(3-4): 193-204. 

Wolf, J., 2002. Comparison of two potato simulation models under climate 
change. I. Model calibration and sensitivity analyses. Climate 
Research, 21(2): 173-186. 

Wolfe, D., L.H. Ziska, C. Petzoldt, A. Seaman, L. Chase, and K. 
Hayhoe, 2008. Projected change in climate thresholds in the northeastern 
U.S.: Implications for crops, pests, livestock, and farmers. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 13(5): 
555-575. 

Wolfe, D.W., M.D. Schwartz, A.N. Lakso, Y. Otsuki, R.M. Pool, and 
N.J. Shaulis, 2005. Climate change and shifts in spring phenology 
of three horticultural woody perennials in northeastern USA. 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 49(5): 303-309. 

Woolf, A.B., and I.B. Ferguson, 2000. Postharvest responses to high 
fruit temperatures in the field. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 
21(1): 7-20. 

World Bank, 2000. Bangladesh - climate change and sustainable 
development http://go.worldbank.org/HMG5ZNLDE0. 

World Bank, 2007a. World development indicators. World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 

World Bank, 2007b. World development report 2008, agriculture for 
development. World Bank, Washington, DC. 

Xia, J., S. Niu, and S. Wan, 2009. Response of ecosystem carbon 
exchange to warming and nitrogen addition during two hydrologically 
contrasting growing seasons in a temperate steppe. Global 
Change Biology, 15(6): 1544-1556. 

Yang, H., A. Dobermann, K.G. Cassman, and D.T. Walters, 2006. Features, 
applications, and limitations of the hybrid-maize simulation 
model. Agronomy Journal, 98(3): 737-748. 

Young, J.R., and R. Sweeney, 2007. Arkansas ground water protection 
and management report for 2006. Arkansas Natural Resources 
Commission. 

Yuan, R., 2007. Effects of temperature on fruit thinning with ethephon 
in golden delicious apples. Scientia Horticulturae, 113(1): 8-12. 

Zavaleta, E.S., B.D. Thomas, N.R. Chiariello, G.P. Asner, M.R. Shaw, 
and C.B. Field, 2003. Plants reverse warming effect on ecosystem 
water balance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
100(17): 9892-9893. 

Zhang, X.C., W.Z. Liu, Z. Li, and J. Chen, 2011. Trend and uncertainty 
analysis of simulated climate change impacts with multiple GCMs 
and emission scenarios. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 
151(10): 1297-1304. 

Zhang, Y.-G., M. Hernandez, E. Anson, M.A. Nearing, H. Wei, J.J. 
Stone, and P. Heilman, 2012. Modeling climate change effects on 
runoff and soil erosion in southeastern Arizona rangelands and 
implications for mitigation with rangeland conservation practices. 
Journal of Soil and Water Conservation: (in press). 

Zhao, D., K.R. Reddy, V.G. Kakani, S. Koti, and W. Gao, 2005. Physiological 
causes of cotton fruit abscission under conditions of high 
temperature and enhanced ultraviolet-B radiation. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 124(2): 189-199. 

Zhu, C., Q. Zeng, L.H. Ziska, J. Zhu, Z. Xie, and G. Liu, 2008. Effect 
of nitrogen supply on carbon dioxideinduced changes in competition 
between rice and barnyardgrass (Echinochloa crus-galli). 
Weed Science, 56(1): 66-71. 

Zinn, K.E., M. Tunc-Ozdemir, and J.F. Harper, 2010. Temperature 
stress and plant sexual reproduction: Uncovering the weakest links. 
Journal of Experimental Botany. 

Ziska, L., and P. Manalo, 1996. Increasing night temperature can 
reduce seed set and potential yield of tropical rice. Functional 
Plant Biology, 23(6): 791-794. 

Ziska, L.H., 2010. Elevated carbon dioxide alters chemical management 
of Canada thistle in no-till soybean. Field Crops Research, 
119(2-3): 299-303. 

Ziska, L.H., and J.A. Bunce, 2007. Predicting the impact of changing 
CO2 on crop yields: Some thoughts on food. New Phytologist, 
175(4): 607-618. 

Ziska, L.H., S. Faulkner, and J. Lydon, 2004. Changes in biomass and 
root:shoot ratio of field-grown Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), 
a noxious, invasive weed, with elevated CO2: Implications for 
control with glyphosate. Weed Science, 52(4): 584-588. 

Ziska, L.H., and A. McClung, 2008. Differential response of cultivated 
and weedy (red) rice to recent and projected increases in atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. Agronomy Journal, 100(5): 1259-1263. 

Ziska, L.H., M.B. Tomecek, and D.R. Gealy, 2010. Competitive 
interactions between cultivated and red rice as a function of recent 
and projected increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide. Agronomy 
Journal, 102(1): 118-123. 

Zuzel, J.F., R.R. Allmaras, and R. Greenwalt, 1982. Runoff and soil 
erosion on frozen soils in northeastern Oregon. Journal of Soil and 
Water Conservation, 37(6): 351-354. 

Appendix A 


Chapter 6 References 

Acevedo, M.F., 2011. Interdisciplinary progress in food production, 
food security and environment research. Environmental Conservation, 
38(02): 151-171. 

Adams, R.M., R.A. Fleming, C.-C. Chang, B.A. McCarl, and C. 
Rosenzweig, 1995. A reassessment of the economic effects of 
global climate change on U.S. agriculture. Climatic Change, 30(2): 
147-167. 

Adams, R.M., B. Hurd, S. Lenhart, and N. Leary, 1998. The effects of 
global warming on agriculture: An interpretative review. Climatic 
Change, 11: 19-30. 

Adams, R.M., B.A. McCarl, and L.O. Mearns, 2003. The effects of 
spatial scale of climate scenarios on economic assessments: An 
example from U.S. agriculture. Climatic Change, 60(1): 131-148. 

Adams, R.M., B.A. McCarl, K. Segerson, C. Rosenzweig, K.J. Bryant, 
B.L. Dixon, R. Connor, R.E. Evenson, and D. Ojima, 1999. The 
economic effects of climate change on U.S. agriculture, in R.O. 
Mendelsohn and J.E. Neumann (eds.), The impact of climate 
change on the United States economy, pp. 19-54. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge; New York. 

Adams, R.M., C. Rosenzweig, R.M. Peart, J.T. Ritchie, B.A. McCarl, 
J.D. Glyer, R.B. Curry, J.W. Jones, K.J. Boote, and L.H. Allen, 
1990. Global climate change and U.S. agriculture. Nature, 
345(6272): 219-224. 

Ainsworth, E.A., and D.R. Ort, 2010. How do we improve crop production 
in a warming world? Plant Physiology, 154(2): 526-530. 

Alig, R.J., D.M. Adams, and B.A. McCarl, 2002. Projecting impacts 
of global climate change on the U.S. forest and agriculture sectors 
and carbon budgets. Forest Ecology and Management, 169(1-2): 
3-14. 

Antle, J.M., and S.M. Capalbo, 2010. Adaptation of agricultural and 
food systems to climate change: An economic and policy perspective. 
Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 32(3): 386-416. 

Antle, J.M., S.M. Capalbo, E.T. Elliott, and K.H. Paustian, 2004. 
Adaptation, spatial heterogeneity, and the vulnerability of agricultural 
systems to climate change and CO2 fertilization: An integrated 
assessment approach. Climatic Change, 64(3): 289-315. 

Battisti, D.S., and R.L. Naylor, 2009. Historical warnings of future 
food insecurity with unprecedented seasonal heat. Science, 
323(5911): 240-244. 

Beach, R.H., C. Zhen, A. Thomson, R.M. Rejeseus, P. Sinha, A.W. 
Lentz, D.V. Vedenov, and B.A. McCarl, 2010. Climate change 
impacts on crop insurance. USDA Risk Management Agency, 
Kansas City, MO. 

Burke, M., J. Dykema, D. Lobell, E. Miguel, and S. Satyanath, 2011. 
Incorporating climate uncertainty into estimates of climate change 
impacts, with applications to U.S. and African agriculture. NBER 
Working Paper Series, Working Paper 17092. 

Burney, J.A., S.J. Davis, and D.B. Lobell, 2010. Greenhouse gas mitigation 
by agricultural intensification. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 107(26): 12052-12057. 

Challinor, A., T. Wheeler, C. Garforth, P. Craufurd, and A. Kassam, 
2007. Assessing the vulnerability of food crop systems in Africa to 
climate change. Climatic Change, 83(3): 381-399. 

Challinor, A.J., F. Ewert, S. Arnold, E. Simelton, and E. Fraser, 2009. 
Crops and climate change: Progress, trends, and challenges in 
simulating impacts and informing adaptation. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 60(10): 2775-2789. 

Chen, C.-C., B.A. McCarl, and D.E. Schimmelpfennig, 2004. Yield 
variability as influenced by climate: A statistical investigation. 
Climatic Change, 66(1): 239-261. 

Chhetri, N.B., W.E. Easterling, A. Terando, and L. Mearns, 2010. 
Modeling path dependence in agricultural adaptation to climate 
variability and change. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 100(4): 894-907. 

Claessens, L., J.M. Antle, J.J. Stoorvogel, R.O. Valdivia, P.K. Thornton, 
and M. Herrero, 2012. A method for evaluating climate change 
adaptation strategies for small-scale farmers using survey, experimental 
and modeled data. Agricultural Systems, 111: 85-95. 

Cline, W.R., 2007. Global warming and agriculture: Impact estimates 
by country. Center for Global Development : Peterson Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, DC. 

Cox, C., A. Hug, and N. Buruzelius, 2011. Losing ground: Executive 
summary. Environmental Working Group, Washington, DC. 

Darwin, R., 2004. Effects of greenhouse gas emissions on world 
agriculture, food consumption, and economic welfare. Climatic 
Change, 66(1): 191-238. 

Darwin, R., M.E. Tsigas, J. Lewandrowski, and A. Raneses, 1995. 
World agriculture and climate change: Economic adaptations. 
United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research 
Service http://ideas.repec.org/p/ags/uerser/33933.html. 

Deschenes, O., and M. Greenstone, 2007. The economic impacts of 
climate change: Evidence from agricultural output and random 
fluctuations in weather. The American Economic Review, 97(1): 
354-385. 

Easterling, W.E., P.K. Aggarwal, P. Batima, K.M. Brander, L. Erda, 
S.M. Howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, J.-F. Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, 
and F.N. Tubiello, 2007. Food, fibre and forest products, in 
M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. Van Der Linden and 
C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability: Working Group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, pp. 273-313. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 

Economic Research Service, 2012. Cash receipts, by commodity 
groups and selected commodities, 1924-2010 [computer file]. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture: Washington DC. URL: http://www.ers. 
usda.gov/data/farmincome/finfidmu.htm#cashrec . Accessed May 
31, 2012. 

Edgerton, M.D., 2009. Increasing crop productivity to meet global 
needs for feed, food, and fuel. Plant Physiology, 149(1): 7-13. 

ERS, 2012. Wheat data: Yearbook tables http://www.ers.usda.gov/data/ 
wheat/YBtable21.asp. 

Fischer, G., M. Shah, F. N. Tubiello, and H. van Velhuizen, 2005. 
Socio-economic and climate change impacts on agriculture: An 
integrated assessment, 19902080. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 360(1463): 2067-2083. 

Funk, C.C., and M.E. Brown, 2009. Declining global per capita 
agricultural production and warming oceans threaten food security. 
Food Security, 1(3): 271-289. 

Gornall, J., R. Betts, E. Burke, R. Clark, J. Camp, K. Willett, and A. 
Wiltshire, 2010. Implications of climate change for agricultural 
productivity in the early twenty-first century. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 365(1554): 
2973-2989. 

Hare, W., W. Cramer, M. Schaeffer, A. Battaglini, and C. Jaeger, 2011. 
Climate hotspots: Key vulnerable regions, climate change and 
limits to warming. Regional Environmental Change, 11(0): 1-13. 

Hatfield, J.L., K.J. Boote, B.A. Kimball, L.H. Ziska, R.C. Izaurralde, 
D. Ort, A.M. Thomson, and D. Wolfe, 2011. Climate impacts on 
agriculture: Implications for crop production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 351-370. 

Hertel, T.W., M.B. Burke, and D.B. Lobell, 2010. The poverty implications 
of climate-induced crop yield changes by 2030. Global Environmental 
Change-Human and Policy Dimensions, 20(4): 577-585. 

Appendix A 


Hertel, T.W., and S.D. Rosch, 2010. Climate change, agriculture, and 
poverty. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy. 

Hitz, S., and J. Smith, 2004. Estimating global impacts from climate 
change. Global Environmental Change, 14(3): 201-218. 

Howden, S.M., J.F. Soussana, F.N. Tubiello, N. Chhetri, M. Dunlop, 
and H. Meinke, 2007. Adapting agriculture to climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(50): 
19691-19696. 

Iowa State University, and National Soil Erosion Research Lab, Iowa 
daily erosion project. National Laboratory for Agriculture and the 
Environment and the University of Iowa, http://wepp.mesonet. 
agron.iastate.edu/ http://wepp.mesonet.agron.iastate.edu/. 

IPCC, 2007b. Climate change 2007 : Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K.; New York. 

Isik, M., and S. Devadoss, 2006. An analysis of the impact of climate 
change on crop yields and yield variability. Applied Economics, 
38(7): 835-844. 

Izaurralde, R.C., N.J. Rosenberg, R.A. Brown, and A.M. Thomson, 
2003. Integrated assessment of Hadley Center (HadCM2) 
climate-change impacts on agricultural productivity and irrigation 
water supply in the conterminous United States: Part II. Regional 
agricultural production in 2030 and 2095. Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology, 117(12): 97-122. 

Izaurralde, R.C., A.M. Thomson, J.A. Morgan, P.A. Fay, H.W. Polley, 
and J.L. Hatfield, 2011. Climate impacts on agriculture: Implications 
for forage and rangeland production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 371-381. 

Jarvis, A., C. Lau, S. Cook, E. Wollenberg, J. Hansen, O. Bonilla, 
and A. Challinor, 2011. An integrated adaptation and mitigation 
framework for developing agricultural research: Synergies and 
trade-offs. Experimental Agriculture, 47(2): 185-203. 

Karl, T., J. Melillo, T. Peterson, and S.J. Hassol (Eds.), 2009. Global 
climate change impacts in the United States. Cambridge University 
Press. 

Kelly, D.L., and C.D. Kolstad, 1999. Integrated assessment models for 
climate change control, in H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg (eds.), The 
international yearbook of environmental and resource economics 
1999/2000: A survey of current issues. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, 
UK; Northampton, MA. 

Knutson, C.L., T. Haigh, M.J. Hayes, M. Widhalm, J. Nothwehr, M. 
Kleinschmidt, and L. Graf, 2011. Farmer perceptions of sustainable 
agriculture practices and drought risk reduction in Nebraska, USA. 
Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems, 26(03): 255-266. 

Kucharik, C.J., and S.P. Serbin, 2008. Impacts of recent climate change 
on Wisconsin corn and soybean yield trends. Environmental 
Research Letters, 3(3): 034003. 

Lobell, D.B., and G.P. Asner, 2003. Climate and management contributions 
to recent trends in U.S. Agricultural yields. Science, 
299(5609): 1032. 

Lobell, D.B., and M.B. Burke, 2008. Why are agricultural impacts 
of climate change so uncertain? The importance of temperature 
relative to precipitation. Environmental Research Letters, 3(3): 
034007. 

Lobell, D.B., M.B. Burke, C. Tebaldi, M.D. Mastrandrea, W.P. Falcon, 
and R.L. Naylor, 2008. Prioritizing climate change adaptation 
needs for food security in 2030. Science, 319(5863): 607-610. 

Lobell, D.B., K.G. Cassman, and C.B. Field, 2009. Crop yield gaps: 
Their importance, magnitudes, and causes. Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources, 34(1): 179-204. 

Lobell, D.B., and C.B. Field, 2007. Global scale climatecrop yield 
relationships and the impacts of recent warming. Environmental 
Research Letters, 2(1): 014002. 

Lobell, D.B., C.B. Field, K.N. Cahill, and C. Bonfils, 2006. Impacts of 
future climate change on California perennial crop yields: Model 
projections with climate and crop uncertainties. Agricultural and 
Forest Meteorology, 141(24): 208-218. 

Lobell, D.B., W. Schlenker, and J. Costa-Roberts, 2011. Climate trends 
and global crop production since 1980. Science, 333: 208-218. 

Long, S.P., E.A. Ainsworth, A.D.B. Leakey, and P.B. Morgan, 2005. 
Global food insecurity. Treatment of major food crops with 
elevated carbon dioxide or ozone under large-scale fully open-air 
conditions suggests recent models may have overestimated future 
yields. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 360(1463): 2011-2020. 

Malcolm, S., 2011. Regional economic and environmental impacts of 
agricultural adaptation to a changing climate in the United States 
Forestry and Agriculture Greenhouse Gas Modeling Forum, 
Shepherdstown, WV. 

Malcolm, S., E. Marshall, M. Aillery, P. Heisey, M. Livingston, and 
K. Day-Rubenstein, 2012. Agricultural adaptation to a changing 
climate: Economic and environmental implications vary by U.S. 
Region, ERR-136. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic 
Research Service. 

McCarl, B., 2008. U.S. agriculture in the climate change squeeze: 
Part 1: Sectoral sensitivity and vulnerability. Report to the 
National Environmental Trust http://agecon2.tamu.edu/people/ 
faculty/mccarl-bruce/papers/1303Agriculture%20in%20the%20 
climate%20change%20squeez1.doc. 

Mendelsohn, R., and A. Dinar, 1999. Climate change, agriculture, and 
developing countries: Does adaptation matter? The World Bank 
Research Observer, 14(2): 277-293. 

Mendelsohn, R., W.D. Nordhaus, and D. Shaw, 1994. The impact of 
global warming on agriculture: A Ricardian analysis. The American 
Economic Review, 84(4): 753-771. 

Mertz, O., K. Halsnaes, J.E. Olesen, and K. Rasmussen, 2009. Adaptation 
to climate change in developing countries. Environmental 
Management, 43(5): 743-752. 

Moss, R.H., J.A. Edmonds, K.A. Hibbard, M.R. Manning, S.K. Rose, 
D.P. van Vuuren, T.R. Carter, S. Emori, M. Kainuma, T. Kram, 
G.A. Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, N. Nakicenovic, K. Riahi, S.J. Smith, 
R.J. Stouffer, A.M. Thomson, J.P. Weyant, and T.J. Wilbanks, 
2010. The next generation of scenarios for climate change research 
and assessment. Nature, 463(7282): 747-756. 

Munasinghe, L., T. Jun, and D. Rind, 2011. Climate change: A new 
metric to measure changes in the frequency of extreme temperatures 
using record data. Climatic Change: 1-24. 

Nakicenovic et al. 2000. Special report on emissions scenarios: A 
special report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New 
York. 

NOAA NCDC, 2011. State of the climate: Global analysis for annual 
2011. NOAA National Climatic Data Center http://www.ncdc.noaa. 
gov/sotc/global/2011/13. 

OECD-INEA-FAO, 2010. Climate change and crop insurance in the 
United States. OECD-INEA-FAO workshop on agriculture and 
adaptation to climate change. 

Parry, M., C. Rosenzweig, and M. Livermore, 2005. Climate change, 
global food supply and risk of hunger. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 360(1463): 
2125-2138. 

Parry, M.L., C. Rosenzweig, A. Iglesias, M. Livermore, and G. Fischer, 
2004. Effects of climate change on global food production under 
sres emissions and socio-economic scenarios. Global Environmental 
Change, 14(1): 53-67. 

Patt, A., D. van Vuuren, F. Berkhout, A. Aaheim, A. Hof, M. Isaac, and 
R. Mechler, 2010. Adaptation in integrated assessment modeling: 
Where do we stand? Climatic Change, 99(3): 383-402. 

Appendix A 


Pfister, S., P. Bayer, A. Koehler, and S. Hellweg, 2011. Projected water 
consumption in future global agriculture: Scenarios and related 
impacts. Science of the Total Environment, 409(20): 4206-4216. 

Polsky, C., and W.E. Easterling, 2001. Adaptation to climate variability 
and change in the US Great Plains: A multi-scale analysis of 
Ricardian climate sensitivities. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 
85(1-3): 133-144. 

Quiggin, J., and J. Horowitz, 2003. Costs of adjustment to climate 
change. Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 
47(4): 429-446. 

Ramankutty, N., J.A. Foley, J. Norman, and K. McSweeney, 2002. 
The global distribution of cultivable lands: Current patterns and 
sensitivity to possible climate change. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 
11(5): 377-392. 

Reilly, J., S. Paltsev, B. Felzer, X. Wang, D. Kicklighter, J. Melillo, 
R. Prinn, M. Sarofim, A. Sokolov, and C. Wang, 2007. Global 
economic effects of changes in crops, pasture, and forests due 
to changing climate, carbon dioxide, and ozone. Energy Policy, 
35(11): 5370-5383. 

Reilly, J., F. Tubiello, B. McCarl, D. Abler, R. Darwin, K. Fuglie, S. 
Hollinger, C. Izaurralde, S. Jagtap, J. Jones, L. Mearns, D. Ojima, 
E. Paul, K. Paustian, S. Riha, N. Rosenberg, and C. Rosenzweig, 
2003. U.S. agriculture and climate change: New results. Climatic 
Change, 57(1): 43-67. 

Rosenzweig, C., J.W. Jones, J.L. Hatfield, A.C. Ruane, K.J. Boote, 
P. Thorburn, J.M. Antle, G.C. Nelson, C. Porter, S. Janssen, 
S. Asseng, B. Basso, F. Ewert, D. Wallach, G. Baigorria, and 
J.M. Winter, 2012. The agricultural model intercomparison and 
improvement project (AgMIP): Protocols and pilot studies. Agricultural 
and Forest Meteorology, (in press). 

Rosenzweig, C., and M.L. Parry, 1994. Potential impact of climate 
change on world food supply. Nature, 367(6459): 133-138. 

Rosenzweig, C., F.N. Tubiello, R. Goldberg, E. Mills, and J. Bloomfield, 
2002. Increased crop damage in the U.S. from excess 
precipitation under climate change. Global Environmental Change- 
Human and Policy Dimensions, 12(3): 197-202. 

Sands, R.D., and J.A. Edmonds, 2005. Climate change impacts for the 
conterminous USA: An integrated assessment. Climatic Change, 
69(1): 127-150. 

Schlenker, W., W. Hanemann, and A. Fisher, 2007. Water availability, 
degree days, and the potential impact of climate change on irrigated 
agriculture in California. Climatic Change, 81(1): 19-38. 

Schlenker, W., W.M. Hanemann, and A.C. Fisher, 2005. Will U.S. 
agriculture really benefit from global warming? Accounting for 
irrigation in the hedonic approach. American Economic Review, 
95(1): 395-406. 

Schlenker, W., and D.B. Lobell, 2010. Robust negative impacts of 
climate change on African agriculture. Environmental Research 
Letters, 5(1): 014010. 

Schlenker, W., and M.J. Roberts, 2009. Nonlinear temperature effects 
indicate severe damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 
15594-15598. 

Schmidhuber, J., and F.N. Tubiello, 2007. Global food security under 
climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
104(50): 19703-19708. 

Smit, B., and M.W. Skinner, 2002. Adaptation options in agriculture to 
climate change: A typology. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies 
for Global Change, 7(1): 85-114. 

Soussana, J.-F., A.-I. Graux, and F.N. Tubiello, 2010. Improving 
the use of modelling for projections of climate change impacts 
on crops and pastures. Journal of Experimental Botany, 61(8): 
2217-2228. 

Tilman, D., C. Balzer, J. Hill, and B.L. Befort, 2011. Global food 
demand and the sustainable intensification of agriculture. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(50): 20260-20264. 

Tol, R.S.J., 2009. The economic effects of climate change. The Journal 
of Economic Perspectives, 23(2): 29-51. 

Tubiello, F.N., J.S. Amthor, K.J. Boote, M. Donatelli, W. Easterling, 
G. Fischer, R.M. Gifford, M. Howden, J. Reilly, and C. Rosenzweig, 
2007. Crop response to elevated CO2 and world food 
supply: A comment on food for thought by Long et al. Science 
312:19181921, 2006. European Journal of Agronomy, 26(3): 
215-223. 

Tubiello, F.N., J.F. Soussana, and S.M. Howden, 2007. Crop and 
pasture response to climate change. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 104(50): 19686-19690. 

UNDP, 2007. Human development report 2007/2008. Fighting climate 
change: Human solidarity in a divided world. United Nations 
Development Program, New York. 

USDA, 2009. National resources inventory. Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Washington, D.C., and Center for Survey Statistics 
and Methodology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa http://www. 
nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS//stelprdb1041379.pdf. 

van der Velde, M., F. Tubiello, A. Vrieling, and F. Bouraoui, 2011. 
Impacts of extreme weather on wheat and maize in France: Evaluating 
regional crop simulations against observed data. Climatic 
Change: 1-15. 

Vanloqueren, G., and P.V. Baret, 2009. How agricultural research 
systems shape a technological regime that develops genetic engineering 
but locks out agroecological innovations. Research Policy, 
38(6): 971-983. 

Winkler, J., S. Thornsbury, M. Artavia, F.-M. Chmielewski, D. 
Kirschke, S. Lee, M. Liszewska, S. Loveridge, P.-N. Tan, S. 
Zhong, J. Andresen, J. Black, R. Kurlus, D. Nizalov, N. Olynk, Z. 
Ustrnul, C. Zavalloni, J. Bisanz, G. Bujdos, L. Fusina, Y. Henniges, 
P. Hilsendegen, K. Lar, L. Malarzewski, T. Moeller, R. Murmylo, 
T. Niedzwiedz, O. Nizalova, H. Prawiranata, N. Rothwell, J. 
van Ravensway, H. von Witzke, and M. Woods, 2010. A conceptual 
framework for multi-regional climate change assessments for 
international market systems with long-term investments. Climatic 
Change, 103(3): 445-470. 

Winters, P., R. Murgai, E. Sadoulet, A. de Janvry, and G. Frisvold, 
1998. Economic and welfare impacts of climate change on developing 
countries. Environmental and Resource Economics, 12(1): 
1-24. 

Wolfe, D., L.H. Ziska, C. Petzoldt, A. Seaman, L. Chase, and K. 
Hayhoe, 2008. Projected change in climate thresholds in the northeastern 
U.S.: Implications for crops, pests, livestock, and farmers. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 13(5): 
555-575. 

Yu, T.-H., S. Tokgoz, E. Wailes, and E. Chavez, 2011. A quantitative 
analysis of trade policy responses to higher world agricultural 
commodity prices. Food Policy, 36(5): 545-561. 

Zhang, X.A., and X.M. Cai, 2011. Climate change impacts on global 
agricultural land availability. Environmental Research Letters, 
6(1). 

Chapter 7 References 

Adger, W., S. Agrawala, M.M.Q. Mirza, C. Conde, K. OBrien, J. 
Pulhin, R. Pulwarty, B. Smit, and K. Takahashi, 2007. Assessment 
of adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity, in M.L. 
Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. Van Der Linden and C.E. 
Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability: Working Group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, pp. 717-743. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 

Appendix A 


Adger, W., S. Dessai, M. Goulden, M. Hulme, I. Lorenzoni, D. Nelson, 
L. Naess, J. Wolf, and A. Wreford, 2009. Are there social limits to 
adaptation to climate change? Climatic Change, 93(3): 335-354. 

Adger, W.N., and K. Vincent, 2005. Uncertainty in adaptive capacity. 
Comptes Rendus Geoscience, 337(4): 399-410. 

Agroclimate, 2011. Agroclimate is an interactive website with climate, 
agriculture, and forestry information that allows users to assess 
resource management options with respect to their probable outcomes 
under forecast climate conditions. http://agroclimate.org/. 
Southeast Climate Consortium. 

Alberini, A., A. Chiabai, and L. Muehlenbachs, 2006. Using expert 
judgment to assess adaptive capacity to climate change: Evidence 
from a conjoint choice survey. Global Environmental Change, 
16(2): 123-144. 

Allison, H.E., and R.J. Hobbs., 2004. Resilience, adaptive capacity, 
and the lock-in trap of the Western Australian agricultural region. 
Ecology and Society, 9(1): 3. 

Antle, J.M., 2009. Adaptation of agriculture and the food system to 
climate change: Policy issues. Issues brief 10-03. Testimony to 
house agriculture subcommittee, 2009 - 206.205.47.99. Resources 
for the Future www.rff.org. 

Antle, J.M., and S.M. Capalbo, 2010. Adaptation of agricultural and 
food systems to climate change: An economic and policy perspective. 
Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 32(3): 386-416. 

Arbuckle, J.G.J., 2011. Farmer perspectives on climate change and 
agriculture, paper presented at Climate Change Conference, 
November 1-3, 2011. Heartland Regional Water Coordination 
Initiative, Lied Conference Center, Nebraska City, NE. 

Batie, S.S., 2009. Green payments and the U.S. farm bill: Information 
and policy challenges. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 
7(7): 380-388. 

BC Agriculture, 2012. Climate change adaptation risk and opportunity 
assessment. Provincial report. . British Columbia Agriculture & 
Food Climate Action Initiative. 

Belliveau, S., B. Smit, and B. Bradshaw, 2006. Multiple exposures and 
dynamic vulnerability: Evidence from the grape industry in the 
Okanagan Valley, Canada. Global Environmental Change, 16(4): 
364-378. 

Below, T.B., K.D. Mutabazi, D. Kirschke, C. Franke, S. Sieber, R. 
Siebert, and K. Tscherning, 2012. Can farmers adaptation to 
climate change be explained by socio-economic household-level 
variables? Global Environmental Change, 22(1): 223-235. 

Biesbroek, G.R., R.J. Swart, T.R. Carter, C. Cowan, T. Henrichs, H. 
Mela, M.D. Morecroft, and D. Rey, 2010. Europe adapts to climate 
change: Comparing national adaptation strategies. Global Environmental 
Change, 20(3): 440-450. 

Blackstock, K.L., J. Ingram, R. Burton, K.M. Brown, and B. Slee, 
2010. Understanding and influencing behaviour change by farmers 
to improve water quality. Science of the Total Environment, 
408(23): 5631-5638. 

Borick, C., E. Lachapelle, and B. Rabe, 2011. Climate compared: 
Public opinion on climate change in the United States and Canada. 
Issues in Governance Studies 39, The Brookings Institution, 
Washington, DC http://www.brookings.edu/papers/2011/04_climate_
change_opinion.aspx. 

Brooks, N., W. Neil Adger, and P. Mick Kelly, 2005. The determinants 
of vulnerability and adaptive capacity at the national level and the 
implications for adaptation. Global Environmental Change, 15(2): 
151-163. 

Brown, A., M. Gawith, K. Lonsdale, and P. Pringle, 2011. Managing 
adaptation: Linking theory and practice. UK Climate Impacts 
Programme, Oxford, UK. Retrieved from http://www.ukcip.org.uk/ 
wordpress/wp-content/PDFs/UKCIP_Managing_adaptation.pdf. 

Brown, P.R., R. Nelson, B. Jacobs, P. Kokic, J. Tracey, M. Ahmed, and 
P. DeVoil, 2010. Enabling natural resource managers to self-assess 
their adaptive capacity. Agricultural Systems, 103(8): 562-568. 

Bryant, C., B. Singh, P. Thomassin, L. Baker, S. Desroches, M. Sovoie, 
K. Delusca, M. Doyon, and E. Seyoum, 2008. Evaluation of 
agricultural adaptation processes and adaptive capacity to climate 
change and variability: The co-construction of new adaptation 
planning tools with stakeholders and farming communities in the 
Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean and Montrgie regions of Qubec. 
Final synthesis report project a1332. Submitted to Natural 
Resources Canada Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Program 
adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca. 

Bryant, C.R., B. Smit, M. Brklacich, T.R. Johnston, J. Smithers, Q. 
Chjotti, and B. Singh, 2000. Adaptation in Canadian agriculture to 
climatic variability and change. Climatic Change, 45(1): 181-201. 

Cabrera, D., J.T. Mandel, J.P. Andras, and M.L. Nydam, 2008. What 
is the crisis? Defining and prioritizing the worlds most pressing 
problems. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 6(9): 
469-475. 

Carpenter, S.R., H.A. Mooney, J. Agard, D. Capistrano, R.S. DeFries, 
S. Daz, T. Dietz, A.K. Duraiappah, A. Oteng-Yeboah, H.M. 
Pereira, C. Perrings, W.V. Reid, J. Sarukhan, R.J. Scholes, and A. 
Whyte, 2009. Science for managing ecosystem services: Beyond 
the millennium ecosystem assessment. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 106(5): 1305-1312. 

Chhetri, N.B., W.E. Easterling, A. Terando, and L. Mearns, 2010. 
Modeling path dependence in agricultural adaptation to climate 
variability and change. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 100(4): 894-907. 

Council of Australian Governments, 2007. National climate change 
adaptation framework. Retrieved from http://www.coag.gov.au/ 
coag_meeting_outcomes/2007-04-13/docs/national_climate_ 
change_adaption_framework.pdf. 

Eakin, H., and L.A. Bojrquez-Tapia, 2008. Insights into the composition 
of household vulnerability from multicriteria decision analysis. 
Global Environmental Change, 18(1): 112-127. 

Easterling, W.E., 2009. Guidelines for adapting agriculture to climate 
change, in D. Hillel and C. Rosenzweig (eds.), Handbook of 
climate change and agroecosystems: Impacts, adaptation, and 
mitigation. Imperial College Press; Distributed by World Scientific 
Publishing Co., London; Singapore; Hackensack, NJ. 

Easterling, W.E., P.K. Aggarwal, P. Batima, K.M. Brander, L. Erda, 
S.M. Howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, J.-F. Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, 
and F.N. Tubiello, 2007. Food, fibre and forest products, in 
M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. Van Der Linden and 
C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability: Working Group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, pp. 273-313. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 

FAO, 2010. Climate-smart agriculture policies, practices and 
financing for food security, adaptation and mitigation. Technical 
input prepared for the Hague conference on agriculture food security 
and climate change. FAO Communications Division, Rome. 

Field, C.B., L.D. Mortsch, M. Brklacich, D.L. Forbes, P. Kovacs, 
J.A. Patz, S.W. Running, and M.J. Scott, 2007. North America, 
in M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J.V.D. Linden and 
C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation 
and vulnerability: Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Folke, C., S. Carpenter, B. Walker, M. Scheffer, T. Elmqvist, L. 
Gunderson, and C.S. Holling, 2004. Regime shifts, resilience, and 
biodiversity in ecosystem management. Annual Review of Ecology, 
Evolution, and Systematics, 35: 557-581. 

Appendix A 


Folke, C., T. Hahn, P. Olsson, and J. Norberg, 2005. Adaptive governance 
of social-ecological systems, in Annual review of environment 
and resources, pp. 441-473. Annual Reviews, Palo Alto. 

GAO, 2009. Climate change adaptation: Information on selected federal 
efforts to adapt to a changing climate (GAO-10-114SP) Government 
Accounting Office http://www.gao.gov/assets/210/203899. 
pdf. 

Godfray, H.C.J., J.R. Beddington, I.R. Crute, L. Haddad, D. Lawrence, 
J.F. Muir, J. Pretty, S. Robinson, S.M. Thomas, and C. Toulmin, 
2010. Food security: The challenge of feeding 9 billion people. 
Science, 327(5967): 812-818. 

Goklany, I., 2007. Integrated strategies to reduce vulnerability and 
advance adaptation, mitigation, and sustainable development. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 12(5): 
755-786. 

Gunderson, L.H., and C.S. Holling, 2002. Panarchy: Understanding 
transformations in human and natural systems. Island Press, 
Washington, DC. 

Gunderson, L.H., and C.S. Holling, 2002. Resilience and adaptive 
cycles, in L.H. Gunderson and C.S. Holling (eds.), Panarchy. 
Island Press, Washington. 

Hansen, J.E., R. Ruedy, M. Sato, and K. Lo, 2012. NASA GISS surface 
temperature (GISTEMP) analysis, in Trends: A compendium 
of data on global change. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis 
Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of 
Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A. 

Harrington, L.M.B., and M. Lu, 2002. Beef feedlots in southwestern 
Kansas: Local change, perceptions, and the global change context. 
Global Environmental Change, 12(4): 273-282. 

Harwood, J., R. Heifner, K. Coble, J. Perry, and A. Somwaru, 1999. 
Managing risk in farming: Concepts, research, and analysis. 
Market and Trade Economics Division and Resource Economics 
Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. Agricultural Economic Report No. 774 http://www. 
ers.usda.gov/publications/aer774/. 

Hatfield, J.L., K.J. Boote, B.A. Kimball, L.H. Ziska, R.C. Izaurralde, 
D. Ort, A.M. Thomson, and D. Wolfe, 2011. Climate impacts on 
agriculture: Implications for crop production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 351-370. 

Hendrickson, J., G.F. Sassenrath, D. Archer, J. Hanson, and J. Halloran, 
2008. Interactions in integrated U.S. agricultural systems: 
The past, present and future. Renewable Agriculture and Food 
Systems, 23(Special Issue 04): 314-324. 

Hills, D., and A. Bennett, 2010. Framework for developing climate 
change adaptation strategies and action plans for agriculture in 
western Australia. Department of Agriculture and Food, Western 
Australia Agriculture Authority. 

Howden, M., A. Ash, S. Barlow, T. Booth, S. Charles, B. Cechet, S. 
Crimp, R. Gifford, K. Hennessy, R. Jones, M. Kirschbaum, G. 
McKeon, H. Meinke, S. Park, B. Sutherst, L. Webb, and P. Whetton, 
2003. An overview of the adaptive capacity of the Australian 
agricultural sector to climate change  options, costs and benefits. 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Collingwood, 
Victoria http://www.cse.csiro.au/publications/2003/AGOAgClimateAdaptationReport.
pdf. 

Howden, S.M., J.F. Soussana, F.N. Tubiello, N. Chhetri, M. Dunlop, 
and H. Meinke, 2007. Adapting agriculture to climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(50): 
19691-19696. 

Hua, W., C. Zulauf, and B. Sohngen, 2004. To adopt or not to adopt: 
Conservation decisions and participation in watershed groups, 
paper presented at American Agricultural Economics Association 
Annual Meeting. Denver CO, July. 

IAASTD, 2009. Agriculture at a crossroads: Synthesis report. 
International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and 
Technology for Development (IAASTD), Island Press, Washington, 
D.C. 

Iglesias, A., K. Avis, M.Benzie, P. Fisher, M. Harley, N. Hodgson, L. 
Horrocks, M. Moneo, and J. Webb, 2007. Adaptation to climate 
change in the agricultural sector. Report to European Commission 
Directorate - General for Agriculture and Rural Development. 
ED05334 http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/analysis/external/climate/. 

Iglesias, A., S. Quiroga, M. Moneo, and L. Garrote, 2012. From climate 
change impacts to the development of adaptation strategies: 
Challenges for agriculture in Europe. Climatic Change, 112(1): 
143-168. 

Izaurralde, R.C., A.M. Thomson, J.A. Morgan, P.A. Fay, H.W. Polley, 
and J.L. Hatfield, 2011. Climate impacts on agriculture: Implications 
for forage and rangeland production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 371-381. 

Jackson, L., M. van Noordwijk, J. Bengtsson, W. Foster, L. Lipper, M. 
Pulleman, M. Said, J. Snaddon, and R. Vodouhe, 2010. Biodiversity 
and agricultural sustainability: From assessment to adaptive 
management. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 
2(1-2): 80-87. 

Jackson, L., S. Wheeler, A. Hollander, A. OGeen, B. Orlove, J. Six, D. 
Sumner, F. Santos-Martin, J. Kramer, W. Horwath, R. Howitt, and 
T. Tomich, 2011. Case study on potential agricultural responses 
to climate change in a California landscape. Climatic Change, 
109(Suppl 1): 407-427. 

Jackson, L.E., F. Santos-Martin, Hollander, W.R. Horwath, R.E. 
Howitt, J.B. Kramer, A.T. OGeen, B. S.Orlove, J.W. Six, S.K. 
Sokolow, D.A. Sumner, T.P. Tomich, and S.M. Wheeler, 2009. 
Potential for adaptation to climate change in an agricultural landscape 
in the Central Valley of California final paper. California 
Energy Commission, Sacramento, California http://bibpurl.oclc. 
org/web/39491http://www.energy.ca.gov/2009publications/CEC- 
500-2009-044/CEC-500-2009-044-F.PDF. 

Jones, R., P. Dettmann, G. Park, M. Rogers, and T. White, 2007. 
The relationship between adaptation and mitigation in managing 
climate change risks: A regional response from North Central Victoria, 
Australia. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global 
Change, 12(5): 685-712. 

Jones, R.N., and B.L. Preston, 2011. Adaptation and risk management. 
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 2(2): 296-308. 

Kahan, D., 2012. Cultural cognition as a conception of the cultural 
theory of risk, in R. Hillerbrand, P. Sandin, M. Peterson and S. 
Roeser (eds.), Handbook of risk theory epistemology, decision 
theory, ethics and social implications of risk. Springer Verlag, New 
York. 

Kenny, G., 2011. Adaptation in agriculture: Lessons for resilience 
from eastern regions of New Zealand. Climatic Change, 106(3): 
441-462. 

Klein, R.J.T., S. Huq, F. Denton, T.E. Downing, R.G. Richels, J.B. 
Robinson, and F.L. Toth, 2007. Inter-relationships between adaptation 
and mitigation, in M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, 
P.J. Van Der Linden and C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: 
Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: Working Group II contribution 
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, pp. 745-777. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Klein, R.J.T., E.L.F. Schipper, and S. Dessai, 2005. Integrating 
mitigation and adaptation into climate and development policy: 
Three research questions. Environmental Science & Policy, 8(6): 
579-588. 

Knutson, C.L., T. Haigh, M.J. Hayes, M. Widhalm, J. Nothwehr, M. 
Kleinschmidt, and L. Graf, 2011. Farmer perceptions of sustainable 
agriculture practices and drought risk reduction in Nebraska, USA. 
Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems, 26(03): 255-266. 

Appendix A 


Krishnamurthy, P.K., J.B. Fisher, and C. Johnson, 2011. Mainstreaming 
local perceptions of hurricane risk into policymaking: A case study 
of community GIS in Mexico. Global Environmental Change, 
21(1): 143-153. 

Lal, R., 2011. Sequestering carbon in soils of agro-ecosystems. Food 
Policy, 36, Supplement 1: S33-S39. 

Lin, B.B., 2011. Resilience in agriculture through crop diversification: 
Adaptive management for environmental change. BioScience, 
61(3): 183-193. 

Luers, A.L., and S.C. Moser, 2006. Preparing for the impacts of 
climate change in California: Advancing the debate on adaptation. 
. Report prepared for the California Energy Commission, Public 
Interest Energy Research Program and the California Environmental 
Protection Agency, Sacramento, CA, CEC-500-2005-198-SF. 

Malka, A., J.A. Krosnick, and G. Langer, 2009. The association of 
knowledge with concern about global warming: Trusted information 
sources shape public thinking. Risk Analysis, 29(5): 633-647. 

Marshall, N., C. Stokes, S. Howden, and R. Nelson, 2009. Chapter 15 
enhancing adaptive capacity, in C. Stokes and M. Howden (eds.), 
Adapting agriculture to climate change: Preparing Australian 
agriculture, forestry and fisheries for the future. CSIRO Publishing, 
Collingwood, Vic. 

Marshall, N.A., 2010. Understanding social resilience to climate variability 
in primary enterprises and industries. Global Environmental 
Change, 20(1): 36-43. 

McCarthy, J., O. Canziani, N. Leary, D. Kokken, and K. White, 2001. 
Climate change 2001: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. 
Annex B: Glossary of terms, in Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press Cambridge and 
New York. 

McCown, R.L., 2005. New thinking about farmer decision makers, 
in J.L. Hatfield (ed.) The farmers decision: Balancing economic 
agriculture production with environmental quality, pp. 11-44. Soil 
and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa. 

McCright, A.M., and R.E. Dunlap, 2011. The politicization of climate 
change and polarization in the American publics views of global 
warming, 20012010. Sociological Quarterly, 52(2): 155-194. 

McDaniels, T.L., L.J. Axelrod, N.S. Cavanagh, and P. Slovic, 1997. 
Perception of ecological risk to water environments. Risk Analysis, 
17(3): 341-352. 

Merrill, J., R. Brillinger, and A. Heartwell, 2011. Ready or not? An 
assessment of California agricultures readiness for climate 
change. California Climate and Agriculture Network, Sebastopol, 
CA. 

Miles, E., M. Elsner, J. Littell, L. Binder, and D. Lettenmaier, 2010. 
Assessing regional impacts and adaptation strategies for climate 
change: The Washington climate change impacts assessment. 
Climatic Change, 102(1): 9-27. 

Millar, C.I., N.L. Stephenson, and S.L. Stephens, 2007. Climate change 
and forests of the future: Managing in the FACE of uncertainty. 
Ecological Applications, 17(8): 2145-2151. 

Moebius-Clune, B., H.van Es, and J. Melkonian, 2011. Adapt-N: An 
adaptive nitrogen management tool for corn production. Adaptive 
N management fact sheet 1. Cornell University http://adapt-n.cals. 
cornell.edu/pubs/pdfs/Factsheet1_IntroToAdaptN.pdf. 

Morton, L.W., 2008. The role of civic structure in achieving 
performance-based watershed management. Society & Natural 
Resources, 21(9): 751-766. 

Moser, S., R. Kasperson, G. Yohe, and J. Agyeman, 2008. Adaptation 
to climate change in the northeast United States: Opportunities, 
processes, constraints. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 13(5): 643-659. 

Moser, S.C., and J.A. Ekstrom, 2010. A framework to diagnose barriers 
to climate change adaptation. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 107(51): 22026-22031. 

Nelson, D.R., W.N. Adger, and K. Brown, 2007. Adaptation to environmental 
change: Contributions of a resilience framework. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 32: 395-419. 

NAS, 2010. Toward sustainable agricultural systems in the 21st 
century. Committee on twenty-first century systems, agriculture. 
National Research Council, National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C. 

Nelson, R., P. Kokic, S. Crimp, P. Martin, H. Meinke, S.M. Howden, 
P. de Voil, and U. Nidumolu, 2010. The vulnerability of Australian 
rural communities to climate variability and change: Part IIintegrating 
impacts with adaptive capacity. Environmental Science & 
Policy, 13(1): 18-27. 

Newton, A., S. Johnson, and P. Gregory, 2011. Implications of climate 
change for diseases, crop yields and food security. Euphytica, 
179(1): 3-18. 

NRC, 2009. Restructuring federal climate research to meet the challenges 
of climate change. National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C. 

NRC, 2010. Toward sustainable agricultural systems in the 21st 
century. National Research Council Committee on Twenty-First 
Century Systems, Agriculture, National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C. 

Olesen, J.E., and M. Bindi, 2002. Consequences of climate change for 
European agricultural productivity, land use and policy. European 
Journal of Agronomy, 16(4): 239-262. 

Olesen, J.E., M. Trnka, K.C. Kersebaum, A.O. Skjelvg, B. Seguin, P. 
Peltonen-Sainio, F. Rossi, J. Kozyra, and F. Micale, 2011. Impacts 
and adaptation of European crop production systems to climate 
change. European Journal of Agronomy, 34(2): 96-112. 

Parry, M., N. Arnell, P. Berry, D. Dodman, S. Fankhauser, C. Hope, S. 
Kovats, R. Nicholls, D. Satterthwaite, R. Tiffin, and T. Wheeler, 
2009. Assessing the costs of adaptation to climate change: A 
review of the UNFCCC and other recent estimates. International 
Institute for Environment and Development and Grantham Institute 
for Climate Change, London. 

Parry, M., O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J.v.d. Linden, and C.E. 
Hanson, 2007. Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability 
appendix 1: Glossary, in Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge Univeristy Press, Cambridge, UK, 
and New York. 

Pelling, M., 2011. Conclusion: Adapting with climate change, in M. 
Pelling (ed.) Adaptation to climate change: From resilience to 
transformation. Routledge, London; New York. 

Peterson, G., 2009. Ecological limits of adaptation to climate change, 
in W.N. Adger, I. Lorenzoni and K.L. Obrien (eds.), Adapting 
to climate change: Thresholds, values, governance. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge; New York. 

Petheram, L., K.K. Zander, B.M. Campbell, C. High, and N. Stacey, 
2010. Strange changes: Indigenous perspectives of climate 
change and adaptation in NE Arnhem Land (Australia). Global 
Environmental Change, 20(4): 681-692. 

Preston, B., R. Westaway, and E. Yuen, 2011. Climate adaptation 
planning in practice: An evaluation of adaptation plans from 
three developed nations. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 16(4): 407-438. 

Prokopy, L.S., K. Floress, D. Klotthor-Weinkauf, and A. Baumgart- 
Getz, 2008. Determinants of agricultural best management practice 
adoption: Evidence from the literature. Journal of Soil and Water 
Conservation, 63(5): 300-311. 

Appendix A 


Reid, G., 2009. Building resilience to climate change in rain-fed 
agricultural enterprises: An integrated property planning tool. 
Agriculture and Human Values, 26(4): 391-397. 

Reid, S., B. Smit, W. Caldwell, and S. Belliveau, 2007. Vulnerability 
and adaptation to climate risks in Ontario agriculture. Mitigation 
and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 12(4): 609-637. 

Reidsma, P., F. Ewert, A.O. Lansink, and R. Leemans, 2010. Adaptation 
to climate change and climate variability in European agriculture: 
The importance of farm level responses. European Journal of 
Agronomy, 32(1): 91-102. 

Reilly, J.M., and E. Blanc, 2009. Economics of agricultural impacts, 
adaptation and mitigation, in D. Hillel and C. Rosenzweig (eds.), 
Handbook of climate change and agroecosystems. Imperial College 
Press, London. 

Rogovska, N., and R. Cruse, 2011. Consequences for agriculture in 
Iowa. In, Climate Change Impacts on Iowa 2010, Report to the 
Governor and the Iowa General Assembly, Iowa Climate Change 
Impacts Committee. 

Rosenzweig, C., and F. Tubiello, 2007. Adaptation and mitigation strategies 
in agriculture: An analysis of potential synergies. Mitigation 
and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 12(5): 855-873. 

Roser-Renouf, C., and M. Nisbet, 2008. The measurement of key 
behavioural science constructs in climate change research. International 
Journal of Sustainability Communications, 3: 37-95. 

Simes, A.F., D.C. Kligerman, E.L.L. Rovere, M.R. Maroun, M. 
Barata, and M. Obermaier, 2010. Enhancing adaptive capacity to 
climate change: The case of smallholder farmers in the Brazilian 
semi-arid region. Environmental Science & Policy, 13(8): 801-808. 

Slovic, P., and International Institute for Environment and Development, 
2010. The feeling of risk: New perspectives on risk perception. 
Earthscan: In association with the International Institute for 
Environment and Development, London; Washington, DC. 

Smit, B., I. Burton, R.J.T. Klein, and R. Street, 1999. The science of 
adaptation: A framework for assessment. Mitigation and Adaptation 
Strategies for Global Change, 4(3): 199-213. 

Smit, B., I. Burton, R.J.T. Klein, and J. Wandel, 2000. An anatomy 
of adaptation to climate change and variability. Climatic Change, 
45(1): 223-251. 

Smit, B., and M.W. Skinner, 2002. Adaptation options in agriculture to 
climate change: A typology. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies 
for Global Change, 7(1): 85-114. 

Smit, B., and J. Wandel, 2006. Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. 
Global Environmental Change, 16(3): 282-292. 

Smith, C.M., J.M. Peterson, and J.C. Leatherman, 2007. Attitudes of 
Great Plains producers about best management practices, conservation 
programs, and water quality. Journal of Soil and Water 
Conservation, 62(5): 97A-103A. 

Smith, J., J. Vogel, and J.E. Cromwell III, 2009. An architecture for 
government action on adaptation to climate change. An editorial 
comment. Climatic Change, 95(1): 53-61. 

Spence, A., W. Poortinga, C. Butler, and N.F. Pidgeon, 2011. Perceptions 
of climate change and willingness to save energy related to 
flood experience. Nature Climate Change, 1(1): 46-49. 

Spies, T., T. Giesen, F. Swanson, J. Franklin, D. Lach, and K. Johnson, 
2010. Climate change adaptation strategies for federal forests of 
the Pacific Northwest, USA: Ecological, policy, and socio-economic 
perspectives. Landscape Ecology, 25(8): 1185-1199. 

Stckle, C., R. Nelson, S. Higgins, J. Brunner, G. Grove, R. Boydston, 
M. Whiting, and C. Kruger, 2010. Assessment of climate change 
impact on eastern Washington agriculture. Climatic Change, 
102(1): 77-102. 

Strategy, N.C.A., 2012. National fish, wildlife and plants climate 
adaptation strategy: Public review draft http://www.wildlifeadaptationstrategy.
gov/pdf/public_review_draft.pdf. 

Swanson, D.A., J.C. Hiley, H.D. Venema, and R. Grosshans, 2009. 
Indicators of adaptive capacity to climate change for agriculture in 
the prairie region of Canada: Comparison with field observations. 
Working Paper for the Prairie Climate Resilience Project, Winnipeg: 
International Institute for Sustainable Development. 

Tarnoczi, T., 2011. Transformative learning and adaptation to climate 
change in the Canadian prairie agro-ecosystem. Mitigation and 
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 16(4): 387-406. 

Tarnoczi, T., and F. Berkes, 2010. Sources of information for farmers 
adaptation practices in Canadas prairie agro-ecosystem. Climatic 
Change, 98(1): 299-305. 

Tomich, T.P., S. Brodt, H. Ferris, R. Galt, W.R. Horwath, E. Kebreab, 
J.H.J. Leveau, D. Liptzin, M. Lubell, P. Merel, R. Michelmore, 
T. Rosenstock, K. Scow, J. Six, N. Williams, and L. Yang, 2011. 
Agroecology: A review from a global-change perspective. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 36(1): 193-222. 

USDA Forest Service, 2010. National roadmap for responding to 
climate change www.fs.fed.us/climatechange/pdf/roadmap.pdf. 

Valentin, L., D.J. Bernardo, and T.L. Kastens, 2004. Testing the empirical 
relationship between best management practice adoption and 
farm profitability. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 
26(4): 489-504. 

van Apeldoorn, D.F., K. Kok, M.P.W. Sonneveld, and T. Veldkamp, 
2011. Panarchy rules: Rethinking resilience of agroecosystems, 
evidence from Dutch dairy-farming. Ecology and Society, 16(1). 

Vincent, K., 2007. Uncertainty in adaptive capacity and the importance 
of scale. Global Environmental Change, 17(1): 12-24. 

Walker, B., C.S. Hollin, S.R. Carpenter, and A. Kinzig, 2004. 
Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social-ecological 
systems. Ecology and Society, 9(2). 

Wall, E., and B. Smit, 2005. Climate change adaptation in light of 
sustainable agriculture. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 27(1): 
113-123. 

Wardekker, J.A., A.C. Petersen, and J.P. van der Sluijs, 2009. Ethics 
and public perception of climate change: Exploring the Christian 
voices in the U.S. public debate. Global Environmental Change- 
Human and Policy Dimensions, 19(4): 512-521. 

Weber, E.U., and P.C. Stern, 2011. Public understanding of climate 
change in the United States. American Psychologist, 66(4): 
315-328. 

Wery, J., and J.W.A. Langeveld, 2010. Introduction to the EJA special 
issue on Cropping systems design: New methods for new challenges. 
European Journal of Agronomy, 32(1): 1-2. 

Wilbanks, T., P. Leiby, R. Perlack, J. Ensminger, and S. Wright, 2007. 
Toward an integrated analysis of mitigation and adaptation: Some 
preliminary findings. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 12(5): 713-725. 

Winsten, J.R., 2009. Improving the cost-effectiveness of agricultural 
pollution control: The use of performance-based incentives. Journal 
of Soil and Water Conservation, 64(3): 88A-93A. 

Wolfe, D., L.H. Ziska, C. Petzoldt, A. Seaman, L. Chase, and K. 
Hayhoe, 2008. Projected change in climate thresholds in the northeastern 
U.S.: Implications for crops, pests, livestock, and farmers. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 13(5): 
555-575. 

World Bank, 2010. The economics of adaptation to climate change: 
A synthesis report. World Bank Group, Washington http://climatechange.
worldbank.org/sites/default/files/documents/EACCSynthesisReport.
pdf. 

World Bank, 2011. Climate smart agriculture: Increased productivity 
and food security, enhanced resilience and reduced carbon 
emissions for sustainable development. The International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank, Washington, 
DC. 

Appendix A 


Yohe, G., and R.S.J. Tol, 2002. Indicators for social and economic 
coping capacity - moving toward a working definition of adaptive 
capacity. Global Environmental Change-Human and Policy 
Dimensions, 12(1): 25-40. 

Yohe, G.W., R.D. Lasco, Q.K. Ahmad, N.W. Arnell, S.J. Cohen, C. 
Hope, A.C. Janetos, and R.T. Perez, 2007. Perspectives on climate 
change and sustainability, in M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, 
P.J. Van Der Linden and C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 
2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: Working Group II 
contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, pp. 811-841. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Chapter 8 References 

Adger, W., S. Agrawala, M.M.Q. Mirza, C. Conde, K. OBrien, J. 
Pulhin, R. Pulwarty, B. Smit, and K. Takahashi, 2007. Assessment 
of adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity, in M.L. 
Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. Van Der Linden and C.E. 
Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007 : Impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability : Working Group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, pp. 717-743. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 

Amundson, J.L., T.L. Mader, R.J. Rasby, and Q.S. Hu, 2006. Environmental 
effects on pregnancy rate in beef cattle. Journal of Animal 
Science, 84(12): 3415-3420. 

Baylis, M., and A.K. Githeko, 2006. T7.3: The effects of climate 
change on infectious diseases of animals. Foresight http://www. 
bis.gov.uk/foresight/our-work/projects/published-projects/ 
infectious-diseases/reports-and-publications. 

Beach, R.H., C. Zhen, A. Thomson, R.M. Rejeseus, P. Sinha, A.W. 
Lentz, D.V. Vedenov, and B.A. McCarl, 2010. Climate change 
impacts on crop insurance. USDA Risk Managment Agency, 
Kansas City, MO. 

Burton, I., and B. Lim, 2005. Achieving adequate adaptation in agriculture. 
Climatic Change, 70(1): 191-200. 

Canto, T., M.A. Aranda, and A. Fereres, 2009. Climate change effects 
on physiology and population processes of hosts and vectors that 
influence the spread of hemipteran-borne plant viruses. Global 
Change Biology, 15(8): 1884-1894. 

Diffenbaugh, N.S., C.H. Krupke, M.A. White, and C.E. Alexander, 
2008. Global warming presents new challenges for maize pest 
management. Environment Research Letters, 3. 

Easterling, W.E., 2009. Guidelines for adapting agriculture to climate 
change, in D. Hillel and C. Rosenzweig (eds.), Handbook of 
climate change and agroecosystems: Impacts, adaptation, and 
mitigation. Imperial College Press; Distributed by World Scientific 
Publishing Co., London; Singapore; Hackensack, NJ. 

Easterling, W.E., P.K. Aggarwal, P. Batima, K.M. Brander, L. Erda, 
S.M. Howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, J.-F. Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, 
and F.N. Tubiello, 2007. Food, fibre and forest products, in 
M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. Van Der Linden and 
C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability: Working Group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, pp. 273-313. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 

Field, C.B., L.D. Mortsch, M. Brklacich, D.L. Forbes, P. Kovacs, 
J.A. Patz, S.W. Running, and M.J. Scott, 2007. North America, 
in M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J.V.D. Linden and 
C.E. Hanson (eds.), Climate change 2007 : Impacts, adaptation 
and vulnerability : Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Frank, K.L., T.L. Mader, J.A. Harrington, G.L. Hahn, and M.S. Davis, 
2001. Climate change effects on livestock production in the Great 
Plains, paper presented at 6th International Livestock Environment 
Symposium, American Society of Agricultural Engineers, St. 
Joseph, MI. 

Fuglie, K.O., and P.W. Heisey, 2007. Economic Returns to Public 
Agricultural Research. USDA EB 10, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 
Economic Research Service. 

Gaughan, J.B., N. Lacetera, S.E. Valtorta, H.H. Khalifa, L. Hahn, and 
T. Mader, 2009. Response of domestic animals to animal challenges, 
in K.L. Ebi, I. Burton and G.R. Mcgregor (eds.), Biometeorology 
for adaptation to climate variability and change. Springer, 
Dordrecht; London. 

Gutierrez, A., L. Ponti, and Q. Cossu, 2009. Effects of climate warming 
on olive and olive fly (Bactrocera oleae (Gmelin)) in California 
and Italy. Climatic Change, 95(1): 195-217. 

Gutierrez, A.P., T. DOultremont, C.K. Ellis, and L. Ponti, 2006. Climatic 
limits of pink bollworm in Arizona and California: Effects of 
climate warming. Acta Oecologica, 30(3): 353-364. 

Hahn, G.L., 1995. Environmental management for improved livestock 
performance, health and well-being. Japanese journal of livestock 
management, 30(3): 113-127 /. 

Hatfield, J.L., K.J. Boote, B.A. Kimball, L.H. Ziska, R.C. Izaurralde, 
D. Ort, A.M. Thomson, and D. Wolfe, 2011. Climate impacts on 
agriculture: Implications for crop production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 351-370. 

Howden, M., A. Ash, S. Barlow, T. Booth, S. Charles, B. Cechet, S. 
Crimp, R. Gifford, K. Hennessy, R. Jones, M. Kirschbaum, G. 
McKeon, H. Meinke, S. Park, B. Sutherst, L. Webb, and P. Whetton, 
2003. An overview of the adaptive capacity of the Australian 
agricultural sector to climate change  options, costs and benefits. 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Collingwood, 
Victoria http://www.cse.csiro.au/publications/2003/AGOAgClimateAdaptationReport.
pdf. 

Howden, S.M., J.F. Soussana, F.N. Tubiello, N. Chhetri, M. Dunlop, 
and H. Meinke, 2007. Adapting agriculture to climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(50): 
19691-19696. 

Izaurralde, R.C., A.M. Thomson, J.A. Morgan, P.A. Fay, H.W. Polley, 
and J.L. Hatfield, 2011. Climate impacts on agriculture: Implications 
for forage and rangeland production. Agronomy Journal, 
103(2): 371-381. 

Kimball, B.A., 2011. Effects and interactions with water, nitrogen and 
temperature, in D. Hillel and C. Rosenzweig (eds.), Handbook of 
climate change and agroecosystems : Impacts, adaptation, and 
mitigation, pp. 87-107. Imperial College Press ; Distributed by 
World Scientific Publishing Co., London; Singapore; Hackensack, 
NJ. 

Mika, A.M., R.M. Weiss, O. Olfert, R.H. Hallett, and J.A. Newman, 
2008. Will climate change be beneficial or detrimental to the invasive 
swede midge in North America? Contrasting predictions using 
climate projections from different general circulation models. 
Global Change Biology, 14(8): 1721-1733. 

Morgan, J.A., 2005. Rising atmospheric CO2 and global climate 
change: Responses and management implications for grazing 
lands, in S.G. Reynolds and J. Frame (eds.), Grasslands : 
Developments, opportunities, perspectives. Food and Agricultural 
Organization of the United Nations; Science Publishers, Inc., 
Rome; Enfield, NH. 

Morgan, J.A., D.E. Pataki, C. Krner, H. Clark, S.J. Grosso, J.M. 
Grnzweig, A.K. Knapp, A.R. Mosier, P.C.D. Newton, P.A. 
Niklaus, J.B. Nippert, R.S. Nowak, W.J. Parton, H.W. Polley, and 
M.R. Shaw, 2004. Water relations in grassland and desert ecosystems 
exposed to elevated atmospheric CO2. Oecologia, 140(1): 
11-25. 

Appendix A 


Navas-Castillo, J., E. Fiallo-Oliv, and S. Snchez-Campos, 2011. 
Emerging virus diseases transmitted by whiteflies. Annual Review 
of Phytopathology, 49(1): 219-248. 

Olesen, J.E., M. Trnka, K.C. Kersebaum, A.O. Skjelvg, B. Seguin, P. 
Peltonen-Sainio, F. Rossi, J. Kozyra, and F. Micale, 2011. Impacts 
and adaptation of European crop production systems to climate 
change. European Journal of Agronomy, 34(2): 96-112. 

Patterson, D.T., J.K. Westbrook, R.J.V. Joyce, P.D. Lingren, and J. 
Rogasik, 1999. Weeds, insects, and diseases. Climatic Change, 
43(4): 711-727. 

Polley, H.W., H.B. Johnson, and J.D. Derner, 2003. Increasing CO2 
from subambient to superambient concentrations alters species 
composition and increases above-ground biomass in a C3/C4 
grassland. New Phytologist, 160(2): 319-327. 

Savary, S., A. Nelson, A.H. Sparks, L. Willocquet, E. Duveiller, G. 
Mahuku, G. Forbes, K.A. Garrett, D. Hodson, J. Padgham, S. 
Pande, M. Sharma, J. Yuen, and A. Djurle, 2011. International 
agricultural research tackling the effects of global and climate 
changes on plant diseases in the developing world. Plant Disease, 
95(10): 1204-1216. 

Smit, B., and M.W. Skinner, 2002. Adaptation options in agriculture to 
climate change: A typology. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies 
for Global Change, 7(1): 85-114. 

Thornton, P.K., 2010. Livestock production: Recent trends, future 
prospects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 365(1554): 2853-2867. 

Tubiello, F.N., J.S. Amthor, K.J. Boote, M. Donatelli, W. Easterling, 
G. Fischer, R.M. Gifford, M. Howden, J. Reilly, and C. Rosenzweig, 
2007. Crop response to elevated CO2 and world food 
supply: A comment on food for thought by Long et al. Science 
312:19181921, 2006. European Journal of Agronomy, 26(3): 
215-223. 

Ziska, L.H., and J.A. Bunce, 1998. The influence of increasing growth 
temperature and CO2 concentration on the ratio of respiration to 
photosynthesis in soybean seedlings. Global Change Biology, 4(6): 
637-643. 

Ziska, L.H., and J.R. Teasdale, 2000. Sustained growth and increased 
tolerance to glyphosate observed in a C3, quackgrass (Elytrigia 
repens), grown at elevated carbon dioxide. Functional Plant Biology, 
27(2): 159-166. 

Appendix A 


Appendix B 

Glossary of Commonly Used Terms 

Abscission  The process by which a plant drops one or 
more of its parts, such as a leaf, fruit, flower, or seed. 

Above-ground Net Primary Productivity (ANPP)  
The measure of the net rate of photosynthetic carbon 
sequestration by plants into above-ground components 
(e.g., leaves, stalks, stems, etc.). ANPP can provide 
insight on key ecological processes. 

Adaptive management  A decision process that promotes 
flexible decision-making that can be adjusted in the face 
of uncertainties as outcomes from management actions 
and other events become better understood. Careful 
monitoring of these outcomes both advances scientific 
understanding and helps adjust policies or operations as 
part of an iterative learning process. 

Adaptive capacity  The ability of a system  such as 
a crop or rangelands, a rural community, a socialecological 
system  to weather the effects of and adjust 
to changing climate. 

Aerosols  Extremely fine solid particles that remain 
suspended in the air. 

Agroecology  Loosely defined, agroecology often 
incorporates ideas about a more environmentally 
and socially sensitive approach to agriculture, one 
that focuses not only on production, but also on the 
ecological sustainability of the productive system. This 
definition implies a number of features about society 
and production that go well beyond the limits of the 
agricultural field. Agroecology is integrative because it 
uses systems thinking to apply methods and knowledge 
from multiple scientific disciplines such as agronomy, 
ecology, sociology, and economics to study interactions 
between plants, animals, humans, and the environment 
in agricultural systems. 

Anthesis  The period during which a flower is fully open 
and functional. 

Biological (indirect) effects of climate change  The 
secondary influences on agricultural production, such 
as weeds, insects, and disease-vector distribution. 
Changing climate may cause shifts in weed, insect, 
or disease infestation range, frequency, and intensity, 
which, in turn, may affect agriculture. Indirect effects 
of climate change may amplify or counteract the direct 
effects of climate change. 

Biotroph  An organism that derives nutrients from the 
living tissues of another organism. 

Boll  The seed-bearing capsule of certain plants, 
especially cotton and flax. 

C3 species  Almost all plant life on Earth can be divided 
into two categories based on the way they assimilate 
carbon dioxide into their systems. During the first steps 
in CO2 assimilation, C3 plants form a pair of three 
carbon-atom molecules. C3 species continue to increase 
photosynthesis with rising CO2. C3 plants include more 
than 95 percent of the plant species on Earth. 

C4 species  C4 plants initially form four carbon-atom 
molecules. C4 plants include such crop plants as sugar 
cane and corn. They are the second-most prevalent 
photosynthetic type, and do not assimilate CO2 as well 
as C3 plants. 

Carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization  The enhancement of 
the growth of plants as a result of increased atmospheric 
CO2 concentration. 

Carbon sink  A carbon reservoir, carbon sinks include 
the oceans, plants, and other organisms that remove 
carbon from the atmosphere via photosynthetic 
processes. 

Carbon source  The term describing processes that add 
CO2 to the atmosphere. 

Carbon sequestration  The term describing processes 
that remove CO2 from the atmosphere. 

Cardinal temperatures  The critical temperature range 
for ideal lifecycle development; these vary by species 
and between vegetative and reproductive growth stages. 

Chill requirement  The minimum period of cold weather 
after which a fruit-bearing tree will blossom. 

Climate  Climate, in a narrow sense, is usually defined 
as the average weather or more rigorously as 
the statistical description in terms of the mean and 
variability of relevant quantities over a period of time 
ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. 
The classical period is 30 years, as defined by the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO). The relevant 
quantities are most often surface variables such as 
temperature, precipitation, and wind. Climate in a wider 
sense is the state, including a statistical description, of 
the climate system. 


Climate change  Climate change refers to a statistically 
significant variation in either the mean state of the 
climate or in its variability, persisting for an extended 
period (typically decades or longer). Climate change 
may be due to natural internal processes or external 
forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the 
composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), its Article 1 defines climate 
change as a change of climate which is attributed 
directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the 
composition of the global atmosphere and which is in 
addition to natural climate variability observed over 
comparable time periods. The UNFCCC thus makes 
a distinction between climate change attributable to 
human activities altering the atmospheric composition, 
and climate variability attributable to natural causes. 
See also climate variability. 

Climate change adaptation  Adjustment in natural 
or human systems in response to actual or expected 
climatic stimuli or their effects to moderate harm or 
exploit beneficial opportunities. 

Climate variability  Climate variability refers to 
variations in the mean state and other statistics (such as 
standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes, etc.) 
of the climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond 
that of individual weather events. Variability may be 
due to natural internal processes within the climate 
system (internal variability), or to variations in natural 
or anthropogenic external forcing (external variability). 
See also climate change. 

CO2 enrichment  Addition of CO2 to the atmosphere. 

Coefficient of variation of annual runoff  A measure of 
the variability of runoff. 

Diapause  A suspension of development that can occur at 
the embryonic, larval, pupal, or adult stage, depending 
on the species during adverse conditions. Insect 
diapause is triggered by environmental cues, like 
daylight and temperature. 

Direct (physical) climate change effects  Direct 
effects of climate change effects relate to changes 
in temperature, precipitation, humidity, and CO2 
concentrations. Each of these variables has a direct 
influence on the growth and development of crops, 
rangelands, and livestock. 

Dehiscence  Failure of pollen to form normally and be 
released. 

Dryland Production  Farming occurring in semi-arid 
areas. 

Edaphic  Resulting from or influenced by the soil rather 
than the climate. 

Emissions trajectory  The rate and timing of reductions 
in carbon emissions to meet a given carbon-reduction 
target. 

Endophyte  A plant living within another plant, usually 
as a parasite. 

Evapotranspiration  The sum of evaporation and plant 
transpiration. Evaporation accounts for the movement 
of water to the air from sources such as the soil, canopy 
interception, and water bodies. Transpiration accounts 
for the movement of water within a plant and the 
subsequent loss of water as vapor through stomata in its 
leaves. 

Free-Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE)  FACE is a method 
and infrastructure used to experimentally enrich 
the atmosphere enveloping portions of a terrestrial 
ecosystem with controlled amounts of CO2 (and in 
some cases, other gases), without using chambers or 
walls. 

Forb  A broad-leaved herb (not a grass), especially one 
growing in a field, prairie, or meadow. 

Fossil fuels  A natural fuel such as coal or gas, formed 
in the geological past from the remains of living 
organisms. 

Frost day  A day  or span of days  in which the 
minimum daily temperature dips below freezing. 

Germplasm  The living tissue from which new plants can 
be grown. It can be a seed or another plant part  e.g., a 
leaf, a piece of stem, pollen or even just a few cells that 
can be turned into a whole plant. 

General circulation model (GCM)  These numerical 
models represent physical processes in the atmosphere, 
ocean, cryosphere and land surface, providing a method 
for simulating the global climate systems response to 
increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. 

Global dimming  The gradual reduction in the amount 
of global direct irradiance at the Earths surface that 
was observed for several decades after the start of 
systematic measurements in 1950s. 

Greenhouse Gas (GHG)  A gas that traps heat in 
the atmosphere is called a greenhouse gas. Some 
GHGs, such as CO2, may be emitted or drawn from 
the atmosphere through natural processes or human 
activities. Other GHGs, such as certain fluorinated 
gaseous compounds, are created and emitted solely 
through human activities. The principal GHGs that 
enter the atmosphere because of human activities are 
carbon dioxide (CO2), water vapor (H2O), methane 
(CH4),and nitrogen oxide (NO), as well as fluorinated 
gases, such as hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, 
and sulfur hexafluoride. 

Greenhouse gas mitigation  Reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions (also often referred to as climate change 
mitigation). 

Hedonic estimation method  A widely used statistical 
methodology for impact assessment. 

Hectare  A 100 x 100 meter area; often used as a measure 
for an area of land. 

Herbivores  Animals that feed chiefly on plants. 

Appendix B 


Homeostasis  The scientific study of periodic biological 
phenomena, such as flowering, breeding, and migration, 
in relation to climatic conditions. 

Integrated assessment model (IAM)  A model that 
combines scientific and socio-economic aspects of 
climate change primarily for the purpose of assessing 
policy options for climate change control. 

Irrigation Modes  

Drip irrigation allows water to drip slowly to the roots of 
plants through a network of valves, pipes, tubing, and 
emitters. 

Flood irrigation pumps water onto the fields. The water 
then flows freely along the ground among the crops. 

Spray irrigation relies on machinery to spray water in all 
directions. 

Leaf area index (LAI)  The ratio of total upper leaf 
surface of a crop divided by the surface area of the land 
on which the crop grows. 

Lignin  An organic substance that, with cellulose, forms 
the chief part of woody tissue. 

Lysimeter  A device for collecting water from the 
pore spaces of soils, and for determining the soluble 
constituents removed in the drainage. 

Mutualistic relationship  A positive, reciprocal 
relationship between two species. Through this 
relationship, both species enhance their survival, 
growth or fitness. 

Necrosis  The premature death of cells in living tissue. 

Necrotroph  An organism that causes the death of host 
tissues as it grows through them such that it is always 
colonizing the dead substrate. 

Net primary productivity (NPP)  The ratio of all 
biomass accumulation and biomass losses in units of 
carbon, weight or energy, per land surface unit, over a 
set time interval (usually a year). 

Panicle  The complete assembly of spikelets found in 
small grains, e.g., rice, wheat, or barley. 

Pathogen  A microorganism that causes disease in its 
host. 

Phenology  The study of periodic biological phenomena 
(e.g., flowering of plants, breeding patterns, and species 
migration) in relation to climatic conditions. 

Phloem  The living tissue that carries organic nutrients 
(known as photosynthate), e.g, sucrose, a sugar, to all 
parts of the plant. 

Physical (direct) climate change effects  The 
physical effects of climate change relate to changes 
in temperature, precipitation, humidity, and CO2 
concentrations. Each of these variables directly 
influences the growth and development of crops, 
rangelands, and livestock. 

Potential evapotranspiration  A representation of the 
environmental demand for evapotranspiration and 
represents the evapotranspiration rate of a short green 
crop, completely shading the ground, of uniform height 
and with adequate water status in the soil profile. It is 
a reflection of the energy available to evaporate water, 
and of the wind available to transport the water vapor 
from the ground up into the lower atmosphere. 

Ruminant  Even-toed, cud-chewing, hoofed mammals of 
the suborder Ruminantia, such as domestic cattle. 

Sidedress  An application of fertilizer between the rows 
of growing crops. 

Social-Ecological System (SES)  A linked system 
of humans and nature in which the flow and use of 
resources (ecological, socioeconomic, and cultural) are 
regulated by the interaction of ecological and social 
systems. Agricultural social-ecological systems are 
ecosystems managed by humans to produce food and 
fiber for a set of interconnected markets 

Spikelet  The individual places on a rice or other similar 
plant where a grain develops. 

Sporulation  Formation of spores. 

Stomatal  One of the minute pores in the epidermis of a 
leaf or stem through which gases and water vapor pass. 

Tiller  New shoots that develop at the base of the plant. 

Threshhold  A point in a system after which any change 
that is described as abrupt is one where the change 
in the response is much larger than the change in the 
forcing. The changes at the threshold are therefore 
abrupt relative to the changes that occur before or after 
the threshold and can lead to a transition to a new state. 

Transdisciplinary research  Transdisciplinary research 
integrates disciplinary knowledge with local knowledge 
of land managers, technical advisors, and the general 
public in participatory research and development. 

Troposphere  The lowest region of the atmosphere, 
extending from the Earths surface to a height of about 
6 km to 10 km. 

Uncertainty  An expression of the degree to which a 
value (e.g., the future state of the climate system) is 
unknown. 

Vernalization  Plants requiring a cold period to flower. 

Vulnerability  The degree to which a system is 
susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of 
climate and global change, including climate variability 
and extremes, as well as climate change in conjunction 
with other stressors. 

Weather  The specific condition of the atmosphere at 
a particular place and time. It is measured in terms 
of parameters such as wind, temperature, humidity, 
atmospheric pressure, cloudiness, and precipitation. 

Appendix B 


Appendix C 

Report Authors and Affiliations 

Lead Author Team 

Charles L. Walthall 

 National Program Leader 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Beltsville, MD 

Jerry Hatfield 

 Laboratory Director and Supervisory Plant 
Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Ames, IA 

 

Peter Backlund 

 Director, Integrated Science Program and External 
Relations 

 National Center for Atmospheric Research 

 Boulder, CO 

Laura Lengnick 

 Visiting Scientist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Beltsville, MD 

Elizabeth Marshall 

 Economist 

 USDA Economic Research Service 

 Washington, DC 

Margaret Walsh 

 Ecologist 

 U.S. Department of Agriculture Climate Change 
Program Office 

 Washington, DC 

Section Authors 

Scott Adkins 

 Research Plant Pathologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Fort Pierce, FL 

 

Marcel Aillery 

 Economist 

 USDA Economic Research Service 

 Washington, DC 

Elizabeth A. Ainsworth 

 Research Molecular Biologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Urbana, IL 

Caspar Ammann 

 Climate Scientist 

 National Center for Atmospheric Research 

 Boulder, CO 

Christopher J. Anderson 

 Assistant Director Climate Science Program 

 Iowa State University 

 Ames, IA 

 

Ignasi (Nacho) Bartomeus 

 Post-doctoral Fellow 

 Rutgers University 

 New Brunswick, NJ 

Lance H. Baumgard 

 Associate Professor 

 Iowa State University 

 Ames, IA 

Fitzgerald Booker 

 Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Raleigh, NC 

Bethany Bradley 

 Assistant Professor 

 University of Massachusetts 

 Amherst, MA 

Dana M. Blumenthal 

 Ecologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Ft. Collins, CO 

James Bunce 

 Research Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Beltsville, MD 

Kent Burkey 

 Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Raleigh, NC 

Seth M. Dabney 

 Supervisory Research Agronomist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Oxford, MS 


Jorge A. Delgado 

 Research Soil Scientist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Fort Collins, CO 

Jeffrey Dukes 

 Associate Professor 

 Purdue University 

 West Lafayette, IN 

Andy Funk 

 Agricultural Science Technician 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Beltsville, MD 

Karen Garrett 

 Professor 

 Kansas State University 

 Manhattan, KS 

Michael Glenn 

 Plant Physiologist, Director and Research Leader 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Kearneysville, WV 

David A. Grantz 

 Plant Physiologist and Cooperative Extension Air 
Quality Specialist 

 University of California - Riverside 

 Parlier, CA 

David Goodrich 

 Civil Engineer 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Tucson, AZ 

Shuijin Hu 

 Associate Professor 

 Department of Plant Pathology, NC State 
University 

 Raleigh, NC 

R. Cesar Izaurralde 

 Laboratory Fellow 

 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory-Joint 
Global Change Research Institute, University of 
Maryland 

 College Park, MD 

Roger A. C. Jones 

 Principal Plant Virologist 

 Crop Protection Branch, Department of 
Agriculture and Food Western Australia 

 Perth, Australia 

Soo-Hyung Kim 

 Assistant Professor 

 University of Washington 

 Seattle, WA 

Andrew D.B. Leakey 

 Assistant Professor 

 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 

 Urbana, IL 

Kim Lewers 

 Plant Geneticist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Beltsville, MD 

Terry L. Mader 

 Professor 

 Animal Science, University of Nebraska
Concord, NE 

Anna McClung 

 Research Plant Geneticist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Stuttgardt, AR 

Jack Morgan 

 Research Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Fort Collins, CO 

David J. Muth 

 Research Engineer 

 Idaho National Laboratory 

 Idaho Falls, ID 

Mark Nearing 

 Research Agricultural Engineer 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Tucson, AZ 

Derrick M. Oosterhuis 

 Professor 

 University of Arkansas 

 Fayetteville, AR 

Donald Ort 

 Research Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Urbana, IL 

Camille Parmesan 

 Chair, Marine Institute 

 Plymouth University 

 Plymouth, U.K. 

William T. Pettigrew 

 Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Stoneville, MS 

Wayne Polley 

 Research Ecologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Temple, TX 

Appendix C 


Romina Rader 

 Post-doctoral Fellow 

 Stockholm University 

 Stockholm, Sweden 

Charles Rice 

 Professor 

 Kansas State University 

 Manhattan, KS 

Mike Rivington 
Research Scientist 

 The James Hutton Institute
Aberdeen, Scotland UK 

Erin Rosskopf 

 Microbiologist/Weed Scientist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Ft. Pierce, FL 

William A. Salas 

 President and Chief Scientist 

 Applied GeoSolutions, LLC
Durham, NH 

Lynn E. Sollenberger 

 Professor 

 University of Florida 

 Gainesville, FL 

Robert Srygley 

 Research Ecologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Sidney, MT 

Claudio Stckle 

 Professor 

 Washington State University 

 Pullman, WA 

Eugene S. Takle 

 Director, Climate Science Program 

 Iowa State University 

 Ames, IA 

Dennis Timlin 

 Research Soil Scientist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Beltsville, MD 

Jeffrey W. White 

 Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Maricopa, AZ 

Rachael Winfree 

 Assistant Professor 

 Rutgers University 

 New Brunswick, NJ 

Lois Wright-Morton 

 Professor 

 Iowa State University 

 Ames, IA 

Lewis H. Ziska 

 Research Plant Physiologist 

 USDA Agricultural Research Service 

 Beltsville, MD 

Staff Support 

Brian Bevirt 

 Proofreader 

 National Center for Atmospheric Research 

 Boulder, CO 

Chelcy Ford 
National Climate Assessment Liaison, U.S. Global 
Change Research Program 

 USDA Forest Service
Washington, DC 

Rachel Hauser 

 External Relations Specialist/Writer 

 National Center for Atmospheric Research 

 Boulder, CO 

Michelle McCambridge 

 Program Assistant 

 National Center for Atmospheric Research 

 Boulder, CO 

Carol Park 

 Program Assistant 

 National Center for Atmospheric Research 

 Boulder, CO 

Paula M. Robinson 
Program Specialist and Administrator 

 National Center for Atmospheric Research 

 Boulder, CO 

 

Michael Shibao 

 Graphic Design 

 Smudgeworks 

 Louisville, CO 

Appendix C 


